[Marc Elias]
American democracy is under attack, and the courts are at the center of this fight. From new rulings to hidden loopholes, key decisions are putting voting rights and the very foundation of our democracy at risk. To break it all down, I spoke with three of the nation's leading experts, Congressman Jamie Raskin, Constitutional Law Scholar Nicholas Bowie of Harvard Law School, and former DOJ National Security Official Mary McCord.

By the end of this conversation, they'll reveal how the law is being twisted to undermine democracy. They'll also discuss the steps we can all take right now to stop it. But before we get into any of that, please make sure to like this video, subscribe to the channel to stay informed about how you can defend democracy.

Thank you all for joining this very, very important event, and I'm going to jump right in with the questioning. All right, Congressman Raskin, I have learned so much from you. We are all indebted to you as a public servant and as a constitutional scholar.

You have made the point that one of the great misunderstandings is that there are three co-equal branches of government. As you have said to me, co-equal is not even a word, that the founders anticipated that Congress would be the strongest branch. So as you look at the current political climate and the threats that we face, talk to us about how you think that revolution against monarchy and dictatorship and the role of the executive branch versus Congress, how that should speak to us today in 2025.

[Rep. Raskin]
Thank you for organizing us into this celebration and happy Constitution Day. It's an honor to be with three great constitutional patriots and all the constitutional patriots that you've assembled out there. I'm feeling very giddy because for Constitution Day, we just shut down and tabled an attempt to censor Ilhan Omar for her freedom of speech.

So we actually celebrated Constitution Day. And I've got some of my colleagues here who walked me over to do this. So every little victory for the freedom of speech and expression is a good victory.

And I'm delighted to be with you. You know, my colleagues get up on the floor and they say, you know, Mr. President, you've got to stop doing this to us. We're a co-equal branch.

I just want to say, get up off your knees because co-equal is not even a word, as you say, Mark. It's like extremely unique or irregardless or something like that. It's a complete redundancy.

But it's not true. Our founders had a revolution against monarchy. They understood that the kings were constantly plunging their countries into wars of personal peak and vanity and imperial extension and financial intrigue and so on.

And so they said only the Congress could declare war. Only Congress could control the budgets and impose taxes and tariffs. Donald Trump is the first president in U.S. history who tried to unilaterally impose tariffs on other countries, which is why he got struck down by the Court of National Trade and then by the federal circuit. Clearly unconstitutional. So three co-equal branches or three equal branches? I don't think so.

Article one, first of all, follows immediately upon the preamble, which says we, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare and preserve to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of liberty, do hereby ordain and establish the Constitution of the United States. And then the very next sentence is all legislative power is vested in a Congress of the United States.

And then it lays out all the powers of Congress page after page after page and get to Article 1, Section 8, Clause 18 and all other powers necessary and proper to the execution of the foregoing powers. And then finally, you get to Article 2, which is like this big. The key paragraph is a president shall be removed from office upon impeachment for and conviction of treason, bribery and other high crimes and misdemeanors.

So what is the core job of the president? A lot of people say, well, to be commander in chief. Well, not commander in chief of the union, not commander in chief of the nation, not commander in chief of the government.

If you're a textualist, if you're an originalist, you've got to believe that it's commander in chief of the Army and the Navy and the militias in times of actual service. That's it. So what is the core job of the president?

To take care that the laws are faithfully executed, not distorted, not warped, not deformed, not impounded, not redirected, not rechanneled, just executed. And that means this is the role of the court, is to stop a president who's running muck. And I got to tell you something, Mark, from my perspective on Constitution Day, the district courts are doing their job.

More than 300 cases have been brought, most of them by you, I think, against this reign of terror. And we're winning 96 percent of the time in the district courts, 96 percent of the time. And something like 75 or 80 percent in the circuit courts, overwhelmingly the rule of law is holding, except then you get up to the U.S. Supreme Court, which has been gerrymandered and cracked and packed and sliced and diced like the congressional districts in Texas through all of the political machinations of Mitch McConnell and the Republicans in the Senate. So that's our problem. So the struggle for democracy and the struggle for freedom is also a struggle for the rule of law. And that means we got to stand by judicial independence and those judges who are doing their jobs.

[Marc Elias]
Professor McCord, you are leading some of the most important constitutional litigation going on today. And this includes cases involving Donald Trump's attempts to deport unaccompanied minors. From your perspective, both as a law professor, as a practicing lawyer, and also as someone who served in a very senior role in the Department of Justice, what is the Department of Justice's proper role and what tools do lawyers and advocates have to ensure that the Constitution's protections, particularly of the most vulnerable communities where there's a lot of concern right now, are taken into account?

[Mary McCord]
Sure. Well, first of all, thanks, Mark, for inviting me tonight. I'm really pleased to be here on Constitution Day and also for the really gracious introduction.

I don't lead anything by myself. I work with my team here at ICAP and with other litigators, the unaccompanied minors case we're litigating with the National Immigration Law Center and the National Youth Law Center and our case on birthright citizenship. We have partners at CASA and at the Asylum Seekers Advocacy Project.

And so that's just, I think, a good representation of all the partners in the nonprofit world that have taken on a really outsized load this administration to challenge executive overreach. ICAP is primarily a constitutional litigation shop, and we and other lawyers and advocates certainly use tools of litigation. But litigation alone can't ensure the protection of constitutional rights, especially today.

And you asked me to talk a little bit about what DOJ's role is. Even before I was the acting assistant attorney general for national security, I was principal deputy before that, and I was a prosecutor, a federal prosecutor, for 20 years before that. And I was in a different federal government position before that.

So about 25 years in the federal government in almost all of the Department of Justice. And today what I'm seeing is that the government has totally shifted the burden of complying with the law from sort of the Department of Justice and government lawyers in the first instance to those impacted by executive overreach. So what I experienced in my time there is that when the executive was thinking about some action, whether it was an executive order or a new policy change or something that is going to impact people, and certainly anything that was going to be novel and unprecedented, there would be all kinds of lawyers betting that, right?

They would be doing legal opinions. And that includes not just the Office of Legal Counsel, but say if it was a national security matter, it would have been the lawyers that worked with me in the national security division, lawyers over at the White House that are the lawyers to the National Security Council, an entire lawyers group from all of the national security agencies, all sort of coming up with their best legal analysis about whether what the president wanted to do was lawful under domestic law and under international law. And at least by all accounts, given the speed that we're seeing executive actions coming out, the unprecedented nature of them, you know, really without any, you know, uses of tools like the Alien Enemies Act that we've never seen used in this way historically, right? Uses of other, you know, a new interpretation of the 14th Amendment's birthright citizenship clause that has not, you know, been questioned in well over 100 years and has been ruled upon by the Supreme Court.

The speed of which these things are coming out, the deluge and the reports from, you know, inside government from folks who are still there indicate that that type of legal review just may not be happening in many, if not most of the cases and might be ignored in any event. It feels in many cases like the executive, the highest level of the executive branch really does not want the advice of the career professionals who have, you know, been around for decades. They've seen all the things that have happened before and they know how to give the best legal advice.

And that means that the executive actions we're seeing are really steamrolling Congress' authority, steamrolling the judiciary's authority, things that I think in the past the Department would have said that's going to raise separation of powers concerns, right? Or that's going to raise concerns about the text of the Constitution not authorizing this or the text of a statute not authorizing this. But the burden, again, is on the rest of us, all of you listening and lawyers to actually then bring the cases, take the time and resources and expense to challenge those actions in court.

And then, of course, that burden is also on the judges and judges all over the country, you know, and particularly here in D.C. have just seen their dockets just skyrocket with cases challenging executive action. You combine that then with blacklisting law firms to try to coerce them to actually not do pro bono work, not work with nonprofits, not challenge Trump's executive actions. And that has created a situation where a lot of law firms, even those not blacklisted, have been cowed from doing that kind of work and cowed from doing it publicly.

I can say that because of my own experience with it. It also, we've now seen new targeting of nonprofits, particularly in the wake of the really, really heinous and tragic killing of Charlie Kirk last week. But that's being used as sort of a catalyst for the White House saying we're going to use every tool in our arsenal to crack down on nonprofits that, you know, they want to link that to incitement or encouragement of terrorist activity.

But we know from what we've seen that that targeting could really be just based on nonprofits that are perceived to be political enemies. All of that is, I think, an effort to reduce the number of lawyers who are available to challenge these actions. And again, with that burden shifting, that puts us in a very precarious position.

And I think we're going to talk more about that this later. But when we talk about what are the tools, you know, ideally, litigation would be brought in tandem with policy advocacy, grassroots, you know, organizing to build movements for change. And it's important for lawyers to use their legal knowledge to empower those who will be, who are impacted by executive overreach.

That means support to policymakers and organizers. I've spent a lot of time the last few weeks talking to different local and state officials about the misuse of military authorities and the National Guard and, you know, giving them some legal advice because sometimes they're in consultation because their staffs are not always huge, right? And it means, you know, helping individuals to know their rights.

That means individuals. That means state and local entities. That means organizations.

So there's a lot of different tools that can be brought to bear here, but it's going to take more for sure than just litigation and the courts.

[Marc Elias]
And I'm going to want to come back and I am going to want to talk about those other things, including what we're seeing with the law firms, because I can validate what you're saying. There is a lot of cowardice. There's a lot of concern.

And you're seeing a lot of law firms that have not formally capitulated to the Trump administration backed away from supporting some of these causes. But, you know, Professor Bolli, I want to ask you a question. You know, I had on my podcast, Leah Littman, and I laid out for her what I thought was a coherent constitutional framework that I thought the conservatives on the Supreme Court might be using involving the, you know, the unitary executive versus judicial Marbury versus Madison principles versus congressional powers, explicit versus implied.

I laid out this whole thing and she kind of like shook her head at me and was like, no, no, it's not any of that. Like, that's way too that's it's not anything nearly that complicated. So I think there is a lot of skepticism and cynicism right now about the Supreme Court.

And you've written extensively about constitutional interpretation. And so how would you sort of describe what the Supreme Court's current approach to constitutional interpretation is? Is there a through line?

Is it originalism? Is it textualism? Or is it just Donald Trump always wins?

You know, like, like, what is how should the audience think about the court and the decision process it is currently undertaking?

[Nikolas Bowie]
Yeah, thanks for the question, Mark. And thanks for inviting me to participate in this panel. I feel like the oddball here with my esteemed colleagues on the panel, but I'm glad to participate and welcome so many people here.

How does the court interpret the Constitution? I guess I have a short answer and a long answer, or medium answer. The short answer is, I think the question the court often asks itself when interpreting the Constitution is, what interpretation will give us, the justices on the Supreme Court, the most flexibility to enforce the policies and laws we like, and to invalidate and block the policies and laws we don't like.

And just to elaborate a little bit on what I mean by that, and I don't think I'm the only person with that interpretation. So Justice Jackson on the court right now has used the phrase judicial aggrandizement to describe the same thing. But to give a longer explanation, you know, the Constitution is a short document.

You compare it to constitutions around the world. It's one of the shortest national constitutions. It was designed to be short.

It was designed for anyone to be able to read. And even the amendments to the Constitution are short. And they include things like very broad generalities for what governments can do, what rights we have.

So one example is when Congress, after the Civil War, wanted to protect the voting rights of the formerly enslaved. It proposed a 15th Amendment that prohibited government from denying or abridging the right to vote on account of race. And then in a separate provision, it said the Congress shall have power to enforce this provision by, quote, appropriate legislation.

So Congress's power is to enforce the provision by appropriate legislation. So what does appropriate legislation mean? You know, people have offered all kinds of explanations for that.

In 1965, Congress answered that question by saying, we think appropriate legislation means the Voting Rights Act of 1965, a law that prohibits states from enforcing things like literacy tests that were arbitrarily denying people of color the ability to vote in the South, a law that required states with a history of voter suppression to go to a federal court or the attorney general to review whether its changes were going to diminish the ability of people to vote.

The president signed the bill. The law was then reauthorized in the 1970s and the 1980s. In 2006, the Senate unanimously reauthorized it.

All of these people— Ninety-eight to zero. Yeah, all of these people are determining what is appropriate legislation. And then in 2013, the Supreme Court, five justices on the court, looked at this law and said, we don't think this law is appropriate.

We think it goes too far. And there isn't like an objective standard for how to define a phrase like appropriate. But so much of constitutional interpretation is like this.

So a different provision of the Constitution empowers Congress to provide for the general welfare. Like, what does providing for the general welfare look like? You know, that's the kind of question that in a democracy we elect representatives to answer.

And Congress in 2010 answered that question. We think it means providing more health care to people by requiring states, if they want to receive federal grants, to expand access to Medicaid. The Supreme Court said, we don't think that's providing for the general welfare.

We think that's coercion. Or, you know, a different provision of the Constitution says, the executive power shall be vested in a president. The president shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed.

What does that mean? I would interpret that to mean if there's a law, the president should faithfully comply with the law. They should abide by the law.

Last year, the Supreme Court interpreted that to mean if Congress prohibits the president from taking bribes or trying to disrupt the political process or doing all sorts of other illegal stuff, the president should be immune from these criminal laws, because to take care that the laws be faithfully executed, the president needs freedom, effectively, to violate federal criminal law. So the point is that the Constitution is often not totally clear. Its language is designed for people to debate and interpret with their own principles.

You know, is the purpose of the 15th Amendment to protect the right to vote or, you know, is the purpose of the text to narrow the scope of federal law that regulates voting? You know, that's up to debate. And I wouldn't say that my interpretation is better than yours or anyone else's.

You don't need to go to law school to figure out what is appropriate or what is the general welfare mean. But the consistent pattern between how the Supreme Court interprets these sorts of provisions is it gives the court itself discretion to weigh in and decide when it thinks a law has gone too far. And the country that we have right now is in many ways a product of the court's intervention on the theory that it thinks that its own rules that it has created have been violated, as opposed to what you or I might regard as the text.

So, you know, Congress passed laws to prohibit billionaires from dominating elections. The court invalidated that in Citizens United. Congress passed laws designed to protect dedicated public servants and allow them to do their job without fear of partisanship or having to placate political representatives.

The court struck that down while preserving for itself the ability, perhaps, to uphold civil service protections for members of the Federal Reserve, knock on wood. Will the court continue to uphold that exception? I don't know.

But the through line is that the court's interpretations, for the most part, give the discretion to weigh in when it wants to and to step aside when it does not.

[Marc Elias]
I'll be right back with more of my conversation with leading experts on the Constitution in a moment. But, you know, I started Democracy Docket in 2020 to be the leading source of news, information, and analysis about what is happening to democracy in court. And every day we are witnessing the Trump administration's assault on the rule of law, the Constitution, and now individual liberties.

The team at Democracy Docket fights every single day to keep you informed with the information you need to make smart decisions about how to stand up for democracy and stand up against authoritarianism. Support the team's critical work in helping keep you informed by clicking on the link below. Congressman Raskin, we heard a lot about Congress, what Congress could do.

Congress could restrict, it sounds like, and this is news to me, so I love this conversation, that after the Civil War, Congress restricted what President Johnson could do with the military, you know, which I can only imagine today what your Republican colleagues would say if that was tried. I heard Professor McCord say that Congress could expand voting rights, which we all know. Congress could reclaim its tariff power.

Like, all of these things are in the hands of Congress. And I guess my question to you, obviously, we know Republicans are not going to do any of those things. But do you think we have settled into an era of acceptance of constitutional interpretation among all parties and chambers and branches of government that actually we don't think that Congress has as much power as it does?

And if so, how do we change that so that Congress re-enters the debate as the dominant force of protecting democracy?

[Rep. Raskin]
I appreciate very much what Professor Bowie said. There are ample, robust reserves of power that are not being used in Congress that we have surrendered or the president has seized and they're just lying fallow. And it comes back to the people.

Members of Congress will respond to the people, to their constituents. So we need the people to be exercising the right of free speech and the right of free press and free exercise of religion and so on. All of these things are going to be essential to get Congress to reassert our powers that are being trampled and lost.

And we have not only excellent and astute academic observers saying it, we're having the vast majority of people in the federal judiciary saying it, except for the Supreme Court, which in a very weaselly way uses its shadow docket to issue these opinions, overturning what all of the lower courts have done without even giving an explanation as to why, without full-blown oral argument and briefing and so on. And just kind of in the thick of night, in the shadow docket, savaging what the rule of law is all about.

And so it always comes back to the people, Mark. And I'm sure as one of our great litigators, even you know that, that the people are going to set the context for any legal conflict, for any legislative struggle. It's where the people are.

But the good news is if you read the Constitution and the Bill of Rights the way that I do, the 17 amendments that we've adopted since the original Bill of Rights are a chronicle of the people's struggle for greater and deeper democracy and equality. The vast majority of those amendments are all about expanding democracy. There's a coherent story there.

The 13th Amendment abolishes slavery and involuntary servitude, except in incarceration. The 14th Amendment gives us equal protection and due process. The 15th Amendment bans race discrimination in voting.

The 17th Amendment shifts the mode of election of the U.S. Senators from the legislatures to the people. The 19th Amendment doubles the franchise in America with women's suffrage. The 23rd Amendment gives people in D.C. at least the right to vote in presidential elections. The 24th Amendment bans poll taxes. The 26th Amendment lowers the voting age. The whole trajectory of our constitutional development is towards greater democracy.

And our problems today are not democracy. They're the impediments to democracy. They're the obstacles to democracy.

I'm with John Dewey who says the only solution to the ills of democracy is more democracy. What's killing us? The voter suppression laws are killing us.

The gerrymandering of our congressional districts, which is based on the gerrymandering of our state legislative districts, that you have literal political minorities in states that have been able to gerrymander themselves into power decade after decade and then translate that, especially with new computer technology and artificial intelligence, into micro-grain gerrymandering of the state so that if you got 53 percent of the vote, you can come back with 100 percent of the seats.

So we don't have a constitutional amendment on the right to vote. Some things are still built in the Constitution that will require either constitutional change or another way out, like the Electoral College. This is the National Popular Vote.

Interstate Compact Campaign is a way to try to use the Electoral College to get to a popular vote, and then we amend the Constitution. But look, I mean, it's 2025, and the Electoral College has given us, what, five minority popular vote presidents in our history, twice in this century, in 2000, with George W. Bush in 2016, with Donald Trump, who got beaten by Hillary Clinton by two and a half million votes.

And the Electoral College is just an accident waiting to happen and an invitation to strategic mischief. And even if you don't believe that, it definitely marginalizes the vast majority of America when we get to a general election. The whole campaign comes down to six or seven states, and everybody knows exactly what those states are.

And as we saw on January 6, 2021, the Electoral College system could get you killed these days. Because if you've got a bad faith strategic actor who decides to mobilize pressure on the peaceful transfer of power, that's dangerous. And we've kind of responded to that.

We impeached Trump. We had a 57 to 43 vote to convict him in the Senate, but he, in his inimitable way, survived because he beat the constitutional odds. It was a two thirds to get there.

And so bipartisan majority said he did it. He incited a violent insurrection. And yet he's able to escape.

And then the Supreme Court worked its mega magic in allowing him to stay on the ballot and overturning what is ordinarily the ballot access control of the state legislatures and the state Supreme Courts in the Colorado decision. So in any event, I guess the point I'm making is that we have, I believe, a majority of the American people are not racist. They're not anti-Semites.

They're not misogynist. They don't want authoritarianism. And yet what we've got is a party which under Trump is determined to use every anti-democratic point of leverage there is, both within the constitutional system and outside of it.

[Marc Elias]
Professor McCord, I said I wanted to come back to this topic because I think it's very, very important. The courts will only function as well as the lawyers who bring cases, as plaintiffs who are willing to put their name forward in captions, as civil society is willing to support them both monetarily but also through the public soapbox. And we are seeing a ton of cowardice.

We are seeing the largest law firms in America bow down and refuse to protect the most vulnerable in court. We are seeing organizations afraid to be funding these efforts. We see plaintiffs who you cannot blame them, Professor.

They are afraid that if they step forward, they will be made an example of. And I think there is both, and I could go on to the universities, but I have three faculty members of universities on this, so I don't want to insult any of the three of you or your institutions. But we are watching a lot of big institutions not step forward.

So what is the remedy to this? How do we tackle this? What is the way through this?

We are only eight months into Donald Trump's term.

[Mary McCord]
Well, that's a big question, Mark. And you didn't even include the corporations who are bending the knee, the media organizations. This one really, really bothers me, because if we don't have an independent media, if journalists are going to get fired because they write something that the president doesn't like, we are in real trouble.

And so there are tools that can be used at various levels. Certainly, there's lots of things, and Professor Bowie, that was one of the best recitations of all of Congress's power that I think I've ever heard. And Congress could use that power.

But of course, they're not. It has the power of the purse. It has leverage there.

It created, as Professor Bowie said, it created all the departments and agencies, yet the president is tearing them down. It appropriates money to be spent in the way that Congress decides it should be spent. And then the president ignores that and impounds that.

And unfortunately, while the lower courts rule in favor of those challenging those impoundments, the Supreme Court so far has been staying those rulings. There is more that Congress could do with respect to protecting the right to vote. But instead, we have the president saying through executive orders that he's going to restrict or eliminate mailing, voting, and so many other things.

And so Congress could change the Alien Enemies Act to make clear that it couldn't be used to remove members of a gang from the country. They could amend the IEPA, the International Emergency Economic Powers Act, to say it's crystal clear you can't use this to impose 50% tariffs on all the countries of the world. Well, I could go on and on and on.

So there's powers out there to be used that aren't being used. States and locals have been stepping up, right? The state attorneys generals have been bringing as much litigation as the nonprofits have been.

And also, states and locals can use their own legislative authority to do certain things. And in some places, they are. And unfortunately, in some places, they're doing just the opposite.

They're actually restricting and suppressing the vote and doing the very things that this president wants, and forcing, essentially, their state police forces to enter in agreements with immigration authorities to essentially have the same police powers and arrest powers as immigration agents. Other states and local jurisdictions are passing laws that says our police cannot cooperate with ICE beyond what federal law requires. And it's very, very limited because Congress, back to Congress, set up the system of immigration laws with the idea that this would be a federal immigration enforcement regime and that the states shouldn't be mucking about in it because it needs to be consistent.

And so we can come back. So there's very few things that they actually require state and local police authorities to do in terms of cooperation. So there's those tools that can be used, and there are being used.

And the courage, and not cowardice, courage is contagious. And I thought when the four law firms sued and got temporary restraining orders against the blacklisting, literally in nanoseconds by court time, like the same day that these cases were filed by judges appointed by Republicans, judges appointed by Democrats, that stuff has not mattered in the courts. Judges appointed by Trumps, right?

Trump himself ruling against him because his overreach is so great. Then I thought other firms would stand up. That courage is contagious, but we have not seen that, as you indicated.

Same with universities. Harvard just had a big win. So, you know, shouldn't universities be standing up?

We have seen, you know, shouldn't journalists be standing up? We now have Trump suing the New York Times once again because he just doesn't like the coverage of him. These kind of things are so damaging if people don't stand up.

But the thing I do want to say is the people have to work. You know, I don't know if the viewers tonight are familiar with Harvard political scientist Erica Chenoweth's work and her research over 100 years of mass mobilizations against dictatorships and occupying colonial powers. And her research shows, has led her to reach the conclusion that when 3.5 percent of the population actively participate in civil, nonviolent mass mobilizations on a sort of sustained basis, day for day, no dictator has survived, no colonial power has stayed. And so mobilization, again, with litigation, with policy, courage, you know, begets courage. Those are the things I think that everybody being part of today's webinar, whatever this is we're doing, can participate in and we all need to.

[Marc Elias]
I get asked all the time about the role of the district courts, the courts of appeals and the Supreme Court. And, you know, in some sense, like, obviously, the Supreme Court is the final word. On the other hand, or not on the other hand, but it is also true that all federal judges are subject to Senate confirmation on sort of equal terms.

They all take an oath of office. What do you do with the tension that is obvious in what the congressman is saying, where you have trial courts and courts and even many courts of appeals winding up one place? You have the Supreme Court seemingly, by the way, getting impatient with those trial courts and actually suggesting that they're disobeying Supreme Court orders and the trial courts being like, wait a second.

You know, we're following our oath. We're following the Constitution. We're doing the best we can.

So unpack, if you can, both of those two things. I think they're a little, they're two separate questions, but I wanted your reaction to both of them.

[Nikolas Bowie]
You can imagine going back to 1787 or the first Congress in 1789. They had a Constitution. That's what Constitution Day is meant to celebrate.

But they did not have a government. You know, there was a president, there was a Congress, and then that was it. There was a document and the document laid out certain foundational principles, but the document didn't say, for example, whether there would be a Treasury Department or, you know, what a flag would be or what judges could do.

Instead, it gave instructions. And among those instructions, as Congressman Raskin just quoted from, was Congress has power to enact all laws necessary and proper for carrying into execution the powers of basically any official in the federal government, including the president and including the federal judiciary. So that first Congress, it had its document and nothing else.

It then had to create the federal judiciary. It had to create the executive branch. And it did that by statutes.

It passed a bunch of laws that said, now we have a Department of Justice. Now we have a Department of State. Now we have a Department of, you know, all sorts of the important aspects of the federal government today.

And I think one takeaway from that is the kinds of things that the president can do and the kinds of things that courts can do are all traceable to some law that Congress passed some time ago. And Congress has the authority to regulate what the president and executive branch can do and what courts can do. And Congress has exercised that power all the time.

So, for example, when Congress during Reconstruction, after the Civil War, it really was concerned about the future of formerly enslaved people in the South. It wanted to make sure that they had resources so that they could enjoy practical freedom. But they were worried that the president was going to interfere with Reconstruction.

They thought the president doesn't like this policy. He's going to try to stop it. So what Congress did is it passed a law that said the president cannot issue orders to the military unless it goes through the general of the armies, who at the time was Ulysses S.

Grant. The president at the time was Andrew Johnson. He said, I don't like this law.

He tried to veto it. And Congress, actually, he didn't even try to veto it. He vetoed a different law.

But Congress passed it. It became law. So today, someone might say, oh, you know, to regulate the president, to restrict his power to control the army, that interferes with the president's power as commander in chief.

But at the time, Congress recognized what the president can do is up to us. We have the authority to determine the national policy. That is what we were elected to do.

If we are worried that a president is going to abuse their power, we can regulate them. Same thing with the judiciary. So I think right now, to the extent that, you know, the American people see a president really abusing law or certain courts really doing their best to comply with it, only to be overridden, one source of an answer to that problem is federal law.

It's electing a Congress that has the inclination to regulate and enforce the people's will effectively on what otherwise are rogue actors. There is just no one in the American system, including the president, who can credibly say, I am above the law. No one can regulate me.

I am subject only to my own will. That's just inconsistent with the Constitution and the government that it establishes.

[Marc Elias]
We're now going to turn to audience questions. And as I mentioned before, if you have a question, you can go ahead and put it in the Q&A box. But our first question comes from the most celebrated, recognized expert in constitutional law in America today.

We have a question from Larry Tribe, a professor at Harvard Law School, who literally has written not just the textbook, but probably half of all of the textbooks on constitutional law. So I am honored that Professor Tribe is listening. And so I'm going to ask this question.

I'm going to let each of you answer it. But I'm going to start with you, Professor Bowie, since you also are sitting at Harvard University, maybe down the hall from Professor Tribe. He asks, how confident are you that we will rebuild our democratic institutions and norms in less than a decade after Trump leaves office?

[Nikolas Bowie]
Specific timing. I think I'll do the classic professor move of just answering a question with another question. And I guess I would encourage everyone to think about their own role with respect to our current constitution, because I think Congressman Raskin is right that we cannot depend on others to rebuild our norms and rebuild our democracy.

We can only depend on ourselves and each other. And I guess to reinforce that point, two observations about our current constitution. One, it is not the first constitution we have had.

During the American Revolution through 1788, the United States was governed by a different constitution, the Articles of Confederation. And the Articles of Confederation, like our current constitution, said what the government could do. It specified certain rights.

And one of the striking things, reading the journals or debates of people like James Madison in the 1770s, is just how broken the government was. It was possible for a single state like Rhode Island, which was one of the smallest states at the time, to obstruct anything that Congress wanted to do. Just a tiny minority could stop basically any federal legislation from really taking effect.

And to add an additional obstacle, the Articles of Confederation said they could only be amended with a unanimous approval from all of the states, which meant that that recalcitrant state that didn't want to comply could also stop it from being amended. So it was a sticky and bad working document. And for James Madison, one of the things that he wrote at the time was, like, how are we going to get out of this?

And his answer was, public opinion sets the bounds to every government and is the real sovereign in every free one. Public opinion sets the bounds to every government and is the real sovereign in every free one. And what he meant is that it's fine to have a government that has legal limits.

Those limits deserve to be enforced and respected. But ultimately, the power of any limit comes down to what the public needs and what the public demands. And if the public demands a better constitution, one that would provide for the general welfare and all of the other attributes of the preamble that Congressman Raskin quoted from, then we needed the public to support changing the document.

And so I think that's a valuable lesson for us to think about today, that, you know, it's very easy to be fearful of government, especially when you can see what government is doing now. And we might welcome anyone who promises to distinguish between bad laws and good laws. And we might be fearful that, you know, the lesson from Trumpism is that we don't want government to do anything.

But what that produces is a government that is stuck and a government that does not work and a government that builds rebellion in the form of people like Trump who promise to break through it and do whatever he wants. I think our country is at our best when we empower each other to pursue our shared goals and to increase democratic participation. And I think it's all of our responsibility to identify the problems that we see and be candid that they require a better outcome than what we have inherited.

And to be really imaginative about the constitution we want and not simply try to go back to what we had. That we can do better. We can rebuild and make a better society than what existed before Trump.

And we shouldn't fear what we have now as a warning against experimentation in service of democracy.

[Marc Elias]
Professor McCord, how would you answer Professor Tribe's question about your level of confidence that will rebuild democratic institutions and norms? We can say a decade after or pick your own time frame. But the overall sentiment is one that we hear a lot.

People are worried that something is being broken, something is being unraveled that won't be able to be put back together again. How confident are you that that is not the case? And what can we do to prevent it?

[Mary McCord]
So part of this depends on how much further we go before we get that opportunity to build back. How many people will have left government who are qualified? How much more voter suppression will have taken place so that we don't really have a representative democracy?

And assuming we get to the point of build back, I'm completely in line with Professor Bowie about thinking about what we need. And I think one of the breakdowns that we've seen is because the constitution, of course, even though we have three equal, not co-equal, thank you, Representative Raskin, branches of government, and we have separation of powers, they were always meant to be a little bit overlapping, right? So the president is the commander in chief, but only Congress can declare war, right?

The president has a power and duty to take care of the laws, be faithfully executed, but those are the laws passed by Congress. And for better or worse, and I take Professor Bowie's points on this, the judiciary is the one that says what the law is. So it's always had this push-pull, but at least in modern history, there's been respect within each branch for the powers of the other branches and a desire for them to stay at least somewhat equal.

I mean, that doesn't mean there's never been times when presidents have really pushed the envelope on their authority. That certainly is not brand new with Trump. It's just, you know, in magnitude over previous presidents in recent history.

And that also means what we learned is that norms were a large part of why things worked to the extent that they did work over these many years, is because there were certain things that those in all the branches of the government respected and wanted to maintain. And, you know, one of the obvious ones for me coming from the Department of Justice is the independence of the Department of Justice from the White House directing the Department of Justice to be used for political purposes. That's not written in the Constitution.

That's not required by the Constitution. But it was both, you know, the executive, the president, and whoever was the attorney general since Watergate have known that in order to earn the trust of the American people that the Department of Justice won't be misused for political purposes, there needs to be independence. And ever since Watergate, there have been memos from both the attorney general and the White House counsel that restricted any communications about specific sort of criminal investigations and prosecutions with very limited exceptions.

And that has just gone completely, you know, by the wayside in this administration. I mean, even Trump one had those memos, but Trump two, we don't have those. And those were norms.

And so I think when we think about the building back, we have to think about what additional protections we need for if you get people into government positions who no longer respect the three equal branches of government and the way that they work together and the norms that are required to sustain them.

[Marc Elias]
Congresswoman Raskin, I'm going to ask you the same question about your confidence level, that we will essentially survive this era with a democracy that can be restored afterwards. But I have to note that, you know, many of us thought that after January 6, something had broken that would not easily be repaired. And then it felt like maybe it got better.

You know, Donald Trump was on the outs, but now he's back. He's pardoned those January 6 insurrectionists. And the damage he is doing to democracy feels, as Professor McCord suggested, just legions worse than even it felt in the dark days after January 6, 2021.

We have elections coming up. And there are lots of people, myself included, who are saying, if we elect a Democratic Congress in 2026, that may help stave off the further erosion and undermining of democracy. But there are many people who say, back to me, and I'm sure to you, that, you know, that's just too little too late, that democracy, that Donald Trump's damage over four years will just be too great.

So with all of that background, you know, what do you tell people who wonder what there will be after 2028, you know, when he leaves office? And what do you say to Professor Tribe's question about how confident you are that we'll be able to rebuild democratic institutions and norms afterwards?

[Rep. Raskin]
Hello to my beloved Professor Larry Tribe. And thank you for everything you've been doing. Your question and your question, Mark, are both entirely a question of political will and organizing and education and mobilizing at this point.

I really believe that. And I am having traveled the country. I have the benefit and the privilege of having gone all over the country.

I just got back from New York District 21, Adirondacks, Elise Stefanik's district. I was there with our great new candidate, Blake Gendabine, who's a dairy farmer and a basketball high school coach. I was in Pennsylvania 7 with Janelle Stelson, who came within one point of beating the insurrectionist Scott Perry last time and is running again.

And we brought a couple hundred kids from Democracy Summer there to knock on doors and so on. I'm telling you, the Democrats are on fire everywhere. And I'm only hearing from people who say, oh, the Democrats aren't doing anything.

People who aren't doing anything. But if you get out there and you organize and you fight, you're going to see people are fighting everywhere. And yet, you don't need to count on the Senate majority leader.

We're doing this. You don't have to worry about just the figureheads, because it's happening all over the country. And that's necessary.

It's going to be a popular upsurge that gets us through this nightmare. And I'm totally convinced that we're going to do it, as Mary was saying, and as Nicholas was saying, that everything is under attack. Every institution, the law firms, the colleges, the universities, the states, the counties, the National Guard, everything is under attack.

So we can be fighting everywhere. Everybody can be fighting wherever they are in whatever institution they're in. And you don't need to wait for the DNC.

Just go ahead and do it. That's what I'm doing. Just go out in the country and fight with the people who are on the front lines and stay in close touch with everybody else.

Will you permit me for Constitution Day to leave with a quote from Tom Paine?

[Marc Elias]
Yes. We're going to wrap up right after this anyway. So you can give us that.

[Rep. Raskin]
Well, you know, he got over here in 1974, two years before the revolution. He fell in love with the promise of America. He said, look, if this nation lives up to its values and ideals, it will become an asylum to humanity, he said.

Not an insane asylum, mind you, but a place of refuge for people seeking freedom from political and intellectual and religious repression from all over the world. And he wrote the greatest pamphlet of our history, Common Sense, by which he meant not only all the senses we're born with, if we're lucky, but the sense we have in common, if we're willing to reason and speak together for the common good. And that ignited the American Revolution.

Washington had the Troops of Ballyforge reading it by campfire light. But 1776 was a tough year. And he wanted to write another pamphlet to give people hope and encouragement through the darkness.

So just one little passage from The American Crisis. I'm going to update the language pursuant to strict instructions from Nancy Pelosi, who said Paine was a feminist and he wouldn't mind. And he wouldn't.

He was fighting for women's suffrage in the 18th century. But he said, these are the times that try men and women's souls. The summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will shrink at this moment from the service of their cause and their country.

But everyone that stands with us now will win the love and the favor and the affection of every man and every woman for all time. Tyranny like hell is not easily conquered. But we have this saving consolation.

The more difficult the struggle, the more glorious then will be our victory. Let's make that victory ours. Thank you, everybody.

And happy Constitution Day.