[Brian Tyler Cohen]
This is Democracy Watch. Mark, there is going to be a major Supreme Court ruling dropping, and I want to make sure here that everybody understands what the implications of this Supreme Court decision are going to be. And this is the Calais case, otherwise known as Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.

It hasn't yet dropped, but I want to make sure that in anticipation of some decision on this case, that everybody knows what the stakes are. So first and foremost, can you explain what the implications of Calais are?

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, so this is a case out of Louisiana.

[Marc Elias]
And the backdrop here is that Louisiana, like Alabama, drew maps after the 2020 census that created one rather than two Black Opportunity Districts. In both states, they were sued by my law firm as well as by others to say that the Voting Rights Act, which requires equal opportunity for minority voters, required a second Black Opportunity District. We won that case in Alabama.

It went to the U.S. Supreme Court, and to many people's surprise, it was affirmed. That was the Milligan case. So as a result, there were two Black Opportunity Districts in Alabama.

In Louisiana, we also filed a lawsuit and won. And there, the state of Louisiana decided to comply with the court's order and draw a new map with two rather than one Black Opportunity Districts. Well, what happened next is a group of white voters came along, and they challenged that new legislative map, saying that it was a racial gerrymander that discriminated against white voters.

As offensive as that is, like, this is where we are. They actually describe themselves as non-Black voters, but for simplicity's sake, let's just call them white voters. But in any event, that case then goes up to the U.S. Supreme Court, and that is the Calais case that we are now waiting on a decision. And the problem is that the Supreme Court, when it first heard this case, which was last spring, in the course of the argument, seemed to indicate that it might not just rule against the map that Louisiana drew, but might do so in a way that would either undermine completely or overturn the Voting Rights Act. We grew more concerned because they didn't decide that case, and instead set it for re-argument this term. And when they set it for re-argument, they asked explicitly the two parties to brood the question about whether Section 2 is still in force and whether it's constitutional.

So that has been argued, and what is at stake is the continued viability and effectiveness of the last main major provision of the Voting Rights Act, Section 2. If this gets struck down, or if it gets, you know, just sidelined, you will see more than a dozen, depending on the estimate, New York Times said it was 12, their estimates say it's 19, Fair Fight has said it could be closer to 30, seats held by Black members of Congress, all of whom are Democrats, that could then be subject to redraw by Republican legislatures. And that would be a calamity for voting rights, it would be terrible for democracy, and it would also allow those Republicans to fulfill Donald Trump's wishes of gerrymandering seats at such a level that it would be very difficult for Democrats to win.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
Now, in terms of timing, when is basically the break glass moment? When is the latest that Republicans would be able to see Calais handed down, where they would still be able to redraw their maps so that it could have an impact on the 2026 election? None of which is to say, by the way, that this happening would still have massive impact because we've got every subsequent election beyond 2026.

So at some point it's going to have a huge impact, but at least just thinking in a short, you know, in a short term fashion, what's the latest that we could see this ruling where it could still impact 2026?

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, so the answer is it depends. So, you know, it depends on two things. The first is that different states have different deadlines, right?

So if you remember back when we were talking about Texas, they have a very early filing deadline for candidacy for candidates. It's like November and the cutoff is December. So in Texas, it functionally would be too late.

They have already chosen candidates or candidates have already filed, and it's a relatively early primary election. There are other states, however, though, that have relatively late filing deadlines and don't have their primary elections until the summer. So they have a much further deadline, a much longer runway for changes.

Plus legislatures can change deadlines. So like one of the points that I always make whenever you and I talk about democratic states and people are like, oh, it's too late. I'm like, no, the legislature can change the law, right?

Like it's not too late for democratic states. They control the law. They can change the filing deadlines.

They can change the primary date, right? Within certain limits, they control the calendar. So the short answer is it will depend on the state and how far along they are in their process and whether or not they're willing to change it.

The conventional wisdom is that, you know, if we get into the late spring, it is probably too late for 2026. Certainly by June or early July, when you get the most important cases during war, typically it would be too late because the because there are back end deadlines for the general election that don't allow primaries to move too much later. That said, Brian, you know, there is a world in which you start to see this spring.

Some Republican controlled states in the South just anticipate a favorable ruling in Calais and they will start to redraw their maps, assuming that Calais is overturned, and then just basically say, look, Mark Elias, if you want to sue us, sue us. But we're going to act as if the Voting Rights Act has already been overturned.

[Marc Elias]
Okay.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
So I guess the answer, the question I should be asking here, do you feel like, given the information that we can read from the tea leaves, that the fact that they wanted to hear this case that wasn't even supposed to be about section two of the Voting Rights Act, it was just supposed to be narrowly about the map in Louisiana. And they asked unto themselves if they can hear a broader case challenging the legitimacy of section two of the Voting Rights Act. Does that suggest that we are going to see section two of the Voting Rights Act overturned when the Supreme Court returns its ruling?

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, look, this is the right question. And you just summarized in your question the part of the very long answer I gave at the beginning. So this is among the reasons why everyone needs to subscribe to you and your channel, because you have a way of cutting through all of the complexity of what's going on in politics and law.

And so I encourage everybody to subscribe to this channel. Yes, the answer is yes, that the Supreme Court was asked a question about whether or not the white voters who challenged this map could bring a racial gerrymandering claim. And they converted it at their initiative.

As you say, they requested the case be briefed and argued about section two of the Voting Rights Act, which is not the same thing as racial gerrymandering. It's actually quite separate from racial gerrymandering. They saw this case about one doctrine as an opportunity to simply force the parties into briefing this other question.

So, you know, obviously, that is a sign that things are heading in the wrong direction, right? Because it's not the liberals on the Supreme Court who are doing that. And there isn't a reason why if you simply want to affirm the Voting Rights Act, you need to go through all of this, right?

Yeah. So so it is certainly a bad sign. Now, I won't say that, you know, it's a foregone conclusion, but it is certainly a bad sign.

And when you add that to the questions asked at oral argument, and you add that to just the voting patterns of the of the nine justices, you know, it's hard to see how this ruling turns out favorably. Again, I never give up. We fight until the end.

But I think we all need to anticipate that there is a very strong likelihood that the result here will be very, very bad for democracy, catastrophic for voting rights and bad for Democrats. But, you know, Brian, at that point, we need to dust ourselves off and we need to pick ourselves up and we need to fight with the tools that we have. And so that is my other message to everybody.

Don't become naysayers. Don't become cynics. Don't become people who lose hope.

What we need to do is we need to figure out new tools and new legal theories to move forward with.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
And you are going to be at the forefront of that fight. You've already got litigation in more than 80 cases across the country, largely centered around voting rights. So this is your forte more than anybody else in the United States.

So highly recommend for anybody who is interested in this topic. And this topic is foundational. Anybody who's interested in this topic, please subscribe to Democracy Docket.

I'm going to put the link to Democracy Docket right here on the screen and also in the post description of this video. That is Mark's news outlet that focuses on everything voting in elections. You will be the first to find out if and when something happens at the Supreme Court if you're subscribed.

So again, please make sure to subscribe if you've not yet signed up. Mark, on that point of figuring out what tools we have at our disposal, the way that I'm thinking about this is, OK, is there a world in which, let's say, Democrats can retake the House, ultimately the Senate and the White House? Do you pass some other legislation, for example, that can codify what had previously been settled law in the Voting Rights Act?

Can you codify that moving forward in such a way that it's kind of immune from pressure at the Supreme Court?

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, you can. I mean, there are lots of things Congress can do. And the reason for that is because the Constitution grants the states the authority, but actually gives Congress expressly the ability to alter what the states do by federal legislation.

So Congress has a lot of options. I want to sort of, I don't want to say correct you, but I want to sort of divert this in a slightly different direction, Brian, which is that I think we are beyond the era of codifying what was. Like the John R.

Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act was a codification of what was. It was eventually an effort to recapture what the Voting Rights Act was before the Shelby County decision, which overturned Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act. It updated it, but it largely was modeled after that.

And I think the thing that I challenge everyone watching this video to do, and for all Democrats and progressives to do, is rather than trying to simply restore things back to the pre-Trump era, we need to learn from what Donald Trump did. We don't want to replicate him. We don't.

We're not looking to create a leftist center authoritarian. But we need to be willing to use all of the tools that he was willing to use. And so, you know, the Constitution gives Congress a lot of authority when it comes to redistricting.

I mean, Congress itself could enact a map nationwide. Congress could enact proportional representation. Congress could ban partisan gerrymandering.

Congress could put in place a nationwide preclearance requirement, which Section 5 only applied to certain jurisdictions. They could put in place a nationwide redistricting provision. You and I have talked in earlier videos about a case we won in New York under the New York State Voting Rights Act, which is quite a bit broader than the Federal Voting Rights Act.

We need to be open to moving forward with a positive vision of what we want things to be, rather than a nostalgic view of recapturing old. Going back to where we were in the Biden-Merrick-Garland era is not what I aspire to. Frankly, going back to where we were in the Barack Obama era is not where I aspire to.

Donald Trump has destroyed that world. That isn't going to be a thing. If Donald Trump stands for the proposition that there is strong executive power, then we ought to be in a position to use strong executive power.

If he stands for the proposition that the Department of Justice is under the control of the White House to do bad things, we ought to go in with an affirmative position with a new Democratic president, with using the Department of Justice proactively. I mean, you mentioned that my law firm is involved in 80 cases. Twenty-five of them involve cases that the Department of Justice under Donald Trump has brought, and we're fighting defense in all of those cases.

By the way, not with the help of any of the large law firms, I might add, but my small law firm, we're fighting all those cases. But Brian, Merrick-Garland, and I don't mean to just bash Merrick-Garland, but Merrick-Garland's Department of Justice under the last two years in the Biden administration brought a total of five voting cases. Five.

I mean, like, so I don't want to go back to that, you know. And so I really want everyone watching this to subscribe to this channel and watch this series. And by the way, also watch the series that Brian does with Glenn Kirshner, which I learn a lot from, and his other interviews, because a lot of what Brian is doing is helping us think through not what was, but what can be.

And so much, Brian, of what you did, which I've given you credit for before, and which I will again around the California redistricting process, was an example of that. Like, it was innovative. It was different.

It was not something that we had done before. It was not something that, frankly, Texas did. Like, it was a new model.

And so we just need to be thinking proactively about what tools are available to us and how we do that. And I think that that will lead to stronger voting rights protections than what we had before.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
Well, look, I think you've just proved that there's no better champion for exactly that than what you do. So again, for folks who are looking to elevate Mark's voice, which clearly is very important to do, the best way to do that is to subscribe to Democracy Docket. I'm going to put that link right here on the screen and also in the post description of this video.

And of course, if you want to subscribe to this channel and watch more of this series, that subscribe button's on the screen as well. I'm Brian Taylor Cohen. I'm Mark Elias.

This is Democracy Watch.