[Mark Elias]
The U.S. Supreme Court is on the verge of upending the foundation of American democracy, and free and fair elections are on the line. I've spent my career fighting for voting rights in court, and I can tell you firsthand, what happens in these cases is going to shape America for decades to come. In this video, I will break down the major Supreme Court cases that could decide the future of our elections, but please watch to the end, because I'm going to fill you in on the case I will personally be arguing before the Supreme Court this December.

But before we get into any of that, please subscribe to this channel to stay informed about how you can defend democracy. So in almost all of America, October means we are in the swing of the NFL, and Major League Baseball is in its most exciting month. But here in Washington, D.C., it means a new term of the Supreme Court. I know, a lot less exciting, but very, very consequential. So this term is going to be very, very important for democracy. And it's not just because of all the cases that the Supreme Court is going to hear about Donald Trump and his executive power and his efforts to take over the entire federal government, to undermine the ability of states and localities to control their own affairs, but it is also a really, really important term for voting and elections.

And, you know, look, we're a year out from these midterm elections that are going to tell us whether or not Donald Trump is going to be able to maintain complete power over the federal government, or whether Democrats will take control of either the House or the Senate, or hopefully both, and really be able to serve as an effective check against his authoritarianism. And, you know, I understand the anxiety and skepticism that people have towards the Supreme Court, but we cannot go into this term believing that all is lost. We have to insist that the Supreme Court do its job.

We have to insist that the justices apply the law. We have to insist that they uphold the right to vote as the most fundamental of all rights, which the court has said for decades and generations. So that's the attitude and the mindset that we all need to begin this process.

But I want to take time today to walk you through what are the most important cases that the Supreme Court will hear when it comes to voting and elections, and therefore, in my view, the most important cases they will hear this term, period. Now, there are some big highlighting cases. We're going to talk about those, but we're also going to try to give you insight, try to give you deeper analysis of what to be watching, not just within those cases, but other individual pieces of litigation that are going on that the Supreme Court may also add to its docket this term.

So let's jump right into it and talk first about the big case involving voting by mail. Now, why do I start with that? Because we know Donald Trump hates voting by mail.

We know that the Republican Party hates voting by mail, and they have dedicated tens of millions of dollars in legal fees, in PR operations, in political outreach to try to sow distrust in voting by mail. They have spent that money to try to make it harder for people to vote by mail, easier for their ballots to be rejected, harder for their ballots to ultimately influence the outcome of accurate vote counting and certification process. I mean, this has been a war on voting by mail from start to finish.

Now, from time to time, the legacy media, because they are so committed to both sides journalism, will say, well, maybe actually Republicans don't hate vote by mail. I mean, after all, look, here was a tweet that the RNC sent out, or here was some right-wing advocate saying we need to do voting by mail. Don't listen to that.

It's all a bunch of bullshit. The fact is that, sure, does some intern at the RNC occasionally put out a social media post that says, oh, Republicans should get their mail-in ballots in? Sure.

Is there some right-wing advocate on the outside who is saying, look, we need to run effective vote by mail programs? Sure. I don't doubt that.

But if you look at where the institutional Republican Party is, if you look at the positions that Donald Trump is taking in his executive orders, what's he doing? He's trying to ban voting by mail. Look at the positions that the Department of Justice is taking.

What are they doing? They're trying to undermine voting by mail. The evidence is overwhelming that Republicans and Trump do not want you to be able to vote by mail because they think it will cost them the elections.

It's nothing more complicated than that. It's not ideological. It's not some abstract theory.

It is the practical reality that more Democrats vote by mail, and therefore, they want to use every tool available to them, both legal tools, court tools, executive orders, spreading lies and misinformation. They want to do all of those things to undermine people's confidence in voting by mail and to decrease the number of vote by mail ballots that ultimately count. In fact, this has been going on so long that if you go back to the beginning of Democracy Docket, go look at the first or second piece I ever wrote for Democracy Docket.

It was called The Four Pillars to Protect Voting when Voting by Mail. That piece laid out four things that Democrats and people who care about democracy need to insist in when there is mail-in voting. The first of those four pillars was this, that if you cast a ballot by mail, and it is postmarked by Election Day, even if it comes in a day or two or three after Election Day, that ballot should count it.

No one should be disenfranchised because they cast a ballot by mail and because the post office was slow, because mail delivery was slow, because the county wasn't opening its mail every day. No one should be disenfranchised for that. As long as you as a ballot into the mail on time, that ballot should count.

Now, about 19 to 20 states in the country have actually adopted that rule. We wound up litigating that and achieving that in courts. In some places, some states proactively changed their laws.

But this has been a thorn in the side of the anti-voting movement ever since 2020. It's one of the reasons why they vilify me. It's one of the reasons why they accuse me of every name in the book about the 2020 election, because I was fighting to enfranchise these voters and they wanted these voters disenfranchised.

They have launched a multi-year litigation strategy to see to it that these ballots are rejected. The first case I want to talk to you about is a case out of Illinois. It's Bost v.

Illinois State Board of Elections. Bost is a Republican member of Congress. He doesn't like the fact, Republicans don't like the fact that in Illinois, ballots that are cast by voters, by mail, before Election Day, that are postmarked for Election Day, they count even if they come in after Election Day.

So essentially, Illinois has the version of this policy, this law, that I have long advocated and that Republicans have long challenged. This Bost case, as I call it, is just the latest iteration of this. Now, Bost's challenge was thrown out of court at the lower level for lack of standing.

Essentially, they said that the plaintiffs in that case did not have standing to disenfranchise voters because they don't want their votes to count. They basically said the vote dilution theory that Bost and other Republicans have been peddling to courts around the country, it is not a right guaranteed to them. They haven't suffered an injury.

They don't suffer an injury by having lawful voters cast their ballots. It should tell you something, by the way, that Republicans argue that they are injured when these people's ballots are cast and counted. But the lower courts said that that was not a legally recognizable or what in the law we call cognizable injury.

And one of the elements of standing, it's a doctrine that says, basically, courts will only resolve cases where there are actual injuries. One of the requirements there is that there's a cognizable injury. So the case got dismissed by the trial court.

The case got dismissed by the Court of Appeals. The U.S. Supreme Court took the case only on the issue of standing. Okay, so the only issue that's going to be resolved in Bost itself is the issue of standing, whether or not the plaintiffs in this case had the ability to bring this claim in the first place.

They're not supposed to. And they probably won't get into the underlying question of whether or not these ballots should count or not count. By the way, what is their argument that they shouldn't count?

Well, their argument is that because federal law says that election day is the Tuesday following the first Monday in November, that any ballot that is not counted on that day, i.e. these ballots that come in afterwards, should be ineligible to be counted. So that's their legal argument. Their legal argument is that election day is the Tuesday, and therefore ballots that come in after the Tuesday can't be counted.

Now, this argument is a bit of a Trojan horse, because what else would that argument lead to? It would ban early voting, right? I mean, after all, when you vote early, you have your ability to have your ballots cast and counted before election day.

What else would it throw out? And you've got to pay attention to this, because this has been the dream of Donald Trump going back to the election denialism of 2020, when I and my team kicked his ass in court more than 60 times. What were they saying?

They were saying that if vote counting was not done on election night, they should stop the count. Remember that? Remember the chant, stop the count?

What were they saying? They were saying that none of these mail ballots that had been received by election day, but because Republicans gum up the works, because Republican legislators won't allow these ballots to be counted until after the polls close. Well, if you can't even start opening mail-in ballots until the polls close at 8 p.m. or 9 p.m. or 7 p.m. on election night, well, of course, they don't all get counted by midnight. And that's why if you remember all of these conspiracy theories on the right about a dump of ballots in the middle of the night, there was no illegal dump of ballots. There's nothing untoward going on. What was happening is that these big counties, these counties where you had lots and lots of absentee vote that had been cast, and these are counties like Fulton County in Georgia, like Philadelphia in Pennsylvania, like Fairfax County in Virginia, right?

These are large population centers. So, of course, the vote counting goes on after election night. They wanted those votes to not be counted because Donald Trump was leading at 12 a.m. midnight, right? So, he wanted to stop the count. And that has been the premise of the big lie and his election nihilism ever since. So, don't get fooled into believing all they really care about is that people who cast votes by mail that are postmarked by election day and are received afterwards, that's the beginning of their voter suppression.

That's not the end. That's the beginning of their effort to undermine free and fair elections. It's not the end.

Why are they also targeting Dropboxes if they really care about ballots being received by election day? I mean, after all, Dropboxes are just secure metal containers, and those ballots get picked up several times a day, and then you don't have to worry about mail delays. So, on the one hand, they don't want there to be valid Dropboxes because they want to push these ballots into the mail system so they'll come in late.

Then they want to say those ballots shouldn't count. Well, that's just the beginning of the story. There's a bigger story.

And BOST is the first case that touches on any of these issues, even though, like I said, it deals with the question of standing, we need to watch very carefully to see what is argued in that case, what is the basis of the opinion in that case, what do justices signal in that case that may give us some sense of where the underlying issue shakes out. And the reason for that is because of another case. And this is one I want you to write down.

So, everybody, get out your paper and pen right now and write down Watson versus Republican National Committee. Watson versus Republican National Committee. Now, this is a case out of Mississippi that I have been warning you all about for a year.

This is a case that was brought by the Republican National Committee against the state of Mississippi because Mississippi is one of the 19 states that allows ballots that are cast by Election Day but received after Election Day to count. So, essentially, Mississippi has the version of the law that I have favored and that the RNC and Donald Trump has not. Now, that will be a head-scratcher to many of you.

Why would Mississippi allow this? Because it used to be this was just a good government thing. It used to be that every state was moving towards the rule that I have advocated.

And Mississippi was one of those states that had this rule before Donald Trump got on the big lie bandwagon around this. And so, Mississippi has had this. So, what happened is the Republican National Committee, because it was suing a lot of states that had these rules, and it was fighting me in court in states where I was suing to force states to adopt this rule.

Mississippi had this rule, and the RNC sued them. What happened next is really kind of interesting. And Democracy Docket actually wrote pieces about this at the time, which is the state of Mississippi, which is controlled by Republicans, were like, okay, if the RNC wants to change our law, we'll just change our law.

But then something very curious happened. All of a sudden, Mississippi stopped changing its law. Now, can I prove that that's because the RNC said, no, don't change your law because we want a lawsuit to go to the U.S. Supreme Court. We don't actually care about Mississippi. We care about finding a vehicle to challenge this. No, I can't prove it.

Is there a whole lot of circumstantial evidence, a lot of smoke around that fire? Yes. And you can check out Democracy Docket's reporting on that, and it will lay out the timeline that is awfully suspicious that what was going on here was basically an effort to find a sympathetic state that they could sue.

Well, I'll tell you what I did. I didn't stand by and watch that happen. No, no, no, no, no.

I and my law firm, we represent a group of defendants, a group of voters, an organization that has members. And we, on their behalf, intervened in this case. Now, what does that mean?

That means we became a party. We said, look, if this is going to be litigation between the Republican National Committee and the Republican Secretary of State and the Republican Attorney General in Mississippi, we want to have a seat at this table. And we want to defend the existing law in Mississippi.

We don't want any shenanigans going on there. We want to make sure that there is a full-throated defense of those voters who cast ballots that have them come in after Election Day. So my law firm is in this case.

It's a case that I have been personally watching very, very carefully. I've been talking to you about it. I've been writing about it.

And that case, Watson versus Republican National Committee, has been pending before the Supreme Court to see whether or not they will take that case. The Republican Attorney General and Secretary of State in Mississippi want them to take that case now as part of this term. And so we'll see what happens.

We're going to find out in the next few weeks whether the Supreme Court will hear this case. I don't really put odds on it one way or the other. I think there is a possibility that they take the case now.

And we will be talking about that case in a lot of detail. As soon as they take that case, you can be sure Democracy Talk will be covering it. And I promise you, we'll be back with another video talking about that case and doing an update on where this issue stands.

It's possible that they don't take the case immediately, but they hold it. They just wait and see what happens in that Bost case I told you about, because that's a standing case. So they could say, look, we don't need to decide the Mississippi case until we figure out who has standing.

And therefore, they wait essentially another year, right? So that case would be for the term a year from now. Or it's possible they say, you know, we don't want to hear the case at all.

I kind of think that last thing is the least likely. I think they're going to wind up hearing this case one way or another. I think the question is whether it's sooner or it's later.

But, you know, another good reason to subscribe to Democracy Docket and get its newsletters, and also an important reason why you should be subscribed to this channel. And hit that bell to stay informed when new content is posted. Because I promise you, when there are developments in this case or any other case, you know, the place you're going to hear about it first and with the most detail is going to be through Democracy Docket, through its newsletters, its website, and through videos like this.

Now, there's one other case that is also not yet decided whether the Supreme Court is going to take or not, that is also a standing issue. It doesn't deal specifically with mail-in voting, but I want to flag it in this section of this video because it is another standing issue. This is Pilf v.

Schmidt. This is a case out of Pennsylvania where a right-wing group that oftentimes is seeking to challenge pro-voting laws, they are challenging a Pennsylvania policy that limits access to voter registration records of, in this case, alleged non-citizens. We could do a whole thing about, you know, that sort of, you know, that rhetoric and that effort to demonize and to create fake outrage around nonexistent fraud.

But in any event, Pennsylvania has a policy that limits public access to voter registration records. This was also a case in which the Third Circuit Court of Appeals, the Court of Appeals, found that this organization, Pilf, lacked standing and sent the case back to the district court saying it should be dismissed because, again, the argument is that this group does not suffer injury in this case by the denial of public records under the National Voter Registration Act. It's kind of a technical legal issue, and I'm not going to bore you with a whole lot of details around it, but you should know that case is pending, again, for whether the Supreme Court will hear that case, and we will also find out that.

And again, obviously, if the Supreme Court takes that case up, it will be something that Democracy Docket will cover. All right, so that's mail-in voting. But honestly, the most highly anticipated case of the term in the democracy space, and honestly, one of the most highly anticipated cases of the term, period, is a Voting Rights Act case out of the state of Louisiana.

Now, this is Louisiana versus Calais, and if this name sounds familiar or this issue sounds familiar, it is because the Supreme Court already heard this case. It literally heard this case last term. It had full argument in this case.

It had oral argument, and we were waiting and waiting and waiting and waiting for a final decision to come down in this case out of Louisiana, and on the last day of the term, like where I'm sitting by the computer, I'm hitting refresh. Instead, the Supreme Court tells us that they are not going to decide the case, but rather schedule it for re-argument. What does that mean?

It means they're going to start all over again. More briefing, new questions presented, new oral argument, like the whole shebang is going to be redone this term, and this is a really big deal and, frankly, a very ominous sign. And so let me unpack this for you.

What you need to know about the Louisiana versus Calais case is that it began in a different format. It began as a case that my law firm brought. Other plaintiffs brought similar claims, and we were suing on behalf of Black voters in Louisiana to say that the redistricting maps that were drawn by the state of Louisiana in 2021 violated the voting rights of Black Louisianans.

Essentially, the Voting Rights Act guarantees that minority voters will not be discriminated in voting, including when lines are drawn for new maps. Our claim was, the claim of my law firm on behalf of our clients, was that when Louisiana's legislature, controlled by white Republicans, when they drew the maps, they drew only one district in which Black voters in the state could have a meaningful say in how to elect candidates of choice. So in other words, there was only one district in which the African American population of that state could exercise its power to elect its preferred candidate of choice.

And that when you looked at the demographics of the state, when you looked at the history of the state, when you looked at the geography of the state, you looked at voting patterns of the state, you look at all of these different criteria, that the Voting Rights Act required that there be two districts in which Black voters in that state could exercise political power. That's what the Voting Rights Act is for. That's why it was enacted in 1965.

That's why it was reauthorized over and over and over again, including in 1982 under Ronald Reagan, in 2006 by a vote of 98 to 0 in the U.S. Senate under George Bush. Right? The crown jewel of American democracy that used to enjoy wide bipartisan support, that this law was here to precisely protect the kinds of voters, the Black voters, who had suffered the indignity of having their voting rights denied in this mapping process that took place in 2021.

And we won. We won. And as a result, the court ordered two new districts or a new map with two districts in which Black voters in Louisiana could exercise political power.

The net effect is that there are now two rather than one Democrats in Congress from Louisiana that were put into office in large measure on the basis of Black voters being able to exercise their federally protected rights. Well, what happened next is that a group of non-African American plaintiffs, now it's a kind of a curious term, but that's the term they used, non-African American plaintiffs. I'm just for sake of simplicity going to call them white plaintiffs.

Now, they can write to me or they can tell me what exactly the non-African American plaintiffs are. I'm sure they're going to say they're not all white, but let's be honest. What's driving this is white Republicans in Louisiana don't want Black voters in Louisiana to have political power.

And they found a bunch of white plaintiffs to bring this case. And what they are saying is that this map that was drawn by Louisiana to comply with the court's order, when the court struck down their first map saying it violated the rights of Black voters, the state of Louisiana said, okay, we'll pass a new map to comply with that court order. You may remember Alabama didn't comply with the court order.

They sort of stood at the courthouse doors with their arms crossed and said, no, we'd rather defy a court order than grant Black Alabamians their voting rights. Well, Louisiana didn't do that. Louisiana actually redrew their map, complied with the Voting Rights Act.

And like I said, it resulted now in a map that has given Black Louisianans real power. Well, these white voters bring a claim and say, well, this new map violates our rights. It discriminates against us because we're white people and we feel discriminated against because, you know, we don't now get to elect as many candidates we prefer.

Now, this is the kind of claim that honestly should have just been left out of court. This is the kind of claim that honestly, pre-Trump, the Republican Party wouldn't even have the audacity to bring this claim. They would have been embarrassed to bring this claim.

The idea that a group of white people in Louisiana believe that their federal constitutional rights have been violated because the state of Louisiana followed federal voting rights laws would be considered not just laughable from a legal standpoint, it would be embarrassing politically to the Republican Party. But we don't live in a world before Donald Trump. We live in the Donald Trump world.

And in that world, this is a claim that not only have they proudly brought, has it been financed by who the hell knows who, has it been litigated aggressively, but that case is now in the U.S. Supreme Court. That is the case that we are talking about when we say that there is a major case, perhaps the most important case, involving democracy in the Supreme Court that is being reheard. It is this case.

And so the trial court, to its credit, did in fact dismiss this case, did in fact say this is meritless, did in fact say, no, no, no, I don't know what nonsense you're talking about, but no, we're not striking down this remedial map that the state of Louisiana put in place to comply with the voting rights act after it had failed black voters. But the Supreme Court heard this case last term. And after the oral argument, after the case was submitted, we waited for an outcome.

And the easy outcome would have been to just affirm the decision below. We braced for the worst that they'd reverse the decision below. But they actually did something worse.

They did something more dangerous. They actually said we want this case re-argued. But now, everyone, we want you to argue a different question.

We don't want you to just answer the question of whether these white voters were wronged in this case. We want you to address essentially whether the Voting Rights Act Section 2, the part of the Voting Rights Act that remains after Shelby County gutted one piece of it, the last big part of it, we want you to answer the question of whether it is constitutional at all. Yeah, that's right.

The U.S. Supreme Court is going to decide whether or not the part of the Voting Rights Act that remains in place that protects minority voting rights and that in particular in redistricting context, these Black Opportunity Districts, these Hispanic Opportunity Districts, whether that section of the Voting Rights Act is constitutional or whether it gets wiped off the books. That would be a cataclysmic event. I mean, it would mean that Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Florida, Tennessee, all of them would have free range to do mid-cycle redistricting and obliterate districts that were created to comply with the Federal Voting Rights Act.

South Carolina, I missed. Oh, and Texas. Yeah, Texas, too.

Texas could go back and do yet another gerrymander and say, look, Voting Rights Act, we don't have to comply with that. In fact, we can't comply with that. In fact, complying with that maybe violates the rights of white voters.

And so we're going to do redistricting in all of those places. We're now not talking about five seats, you know, like we're talking about in Texas or a seat here in Missouri or there. We'd be talking about a lot bigger stakes, plus also setting aside the partisanship and the consequences to 2026.

This would undermine Black voting power in the South and nationally, because this law applies not just in the South. It applies to every state and every county in the country. It would have really, really dire consequences.

So we all need to pay attention to this case out of Louisiana. Now, why am I concerned beyond the stakes? Well, because they had to set it for rehearing.

You know, like I said, this shouldn't be that complicated. This shouldn't be that hard. And they shouldn't be having to ask the parties to brief this bigger issue than the one before them.

Unfortunately, this history that I've recited to you is familiar to us. For those of you who are hearing this, this may sound familiar. Yeah, it's familiar to me.

And it may be familiar to many of you who have followed the Supreme Court for years. Because in 2009, the Supreme Court heard a relatively obscure campaign finance case. It was about whether or not a group that no one had ever heard of that had produced a movie that no one wanted to see could put that movie on pay-per-view systems around the country.

Actually, they would be paying the pay-per-view systems to put their movie on. And whether if they put this movie on that was very, very hostile to Hillary Clinton, whether that would somehow violate the nation's campaign finance laws. Essentially, the question was whether if you make a movie about Hillary Clinton that is very derogatory towards her and you pay pay-per-view systems, cable systems, to put it on their stations, does that somehow implicate the federal campaign finance laws?

And the Supreme Court heard that case. And at the end of it, at the end of the term, they ordered that it be re-argued on a broader proposition, which was whether corporations of all sorts could make unlimited independent expenditures. The name of that case was Citizens United versus Federal Election Commission.

And the rest is history. That case, which was heard in the spring of 2009 and then re-argued in the fall of 2009, was then decided on January 10, 2010, and had profound impacts on the 2010 election cycle and every election cycle since. And so when I hear that the Supreme Court wants the re-argument of a case early in its term to potentially be decided maybe early next year, maybe later next year, but before the 2026 election, forgive me if I am skeptical, if I am cynical, and if I am concerned.

Now, look, the fact that I am concerned, the fact that you may also share that concern and that skepticism and that cynicism, it is not a reason to give up hope. Like, we need to insist the Supreme Court do the right thing. We need to insist the Supreme Court follow decades of precedent and uphold the voting rights.

We need to ensure that the Supreme Court do not think that we have given a free pass through our cynicism and our skepticism that we have given them a free pass to do the wrong thing and that we will shrug our shoulders and say, oh, well. We need to always insist every single day that Republican politicians follow their oaths of office. We need to insist every single day that everyone who works in the White House do what the American people are paying them to do.

And we need to insist every single day that every judge in every courthouse in America follows the law and follows the Constitution. Before you tell me that I am some wild-eyed optimist, that it is unrealistic, and how dare I assume that Stephen Miller will do the right thing or Mike Johnson will do the right thing or that the Supreme Court will do the right thing, I am here to tell you that if we are going to build a pro-democracy movement that is going to not just survive the Trump years but restore democracy, we need to start with a premise that we insist that government officials do the right thing. It does not mean we cannot be realistic about it. It does not mean we have to be Pollyannish about it.

The moment we say that that will never happen is the moment that Donald Trump wins, because Donald Trump wants you to think it is all rigged against you. He wants you to think it is all rigged and there is nothing you can do and nothing that lawyers can do, no arguments we can make to persuade judges, nothing we can do, no pressure we can put on elected officials to vote the right way, and we cannot give him that power. So I am going to continue to speak out about this case out of Louisiana.

I am going to continue to keep you, the people who support Democracy Docket, by watching this video, by subscribing to this channel, by subscribing to its newsletter. The links to all of that are below. The subscription button is right in front of you.

Hit the bell to make sure you are alerted when new content is posted. I am going to continue to speak out on all these issues because we cannot give Donald Trump that power. We cannot let it become a foregone conclusion that the Voting Rights Act is going to be struck down.

But that is a very big case for us to all be following. Now, that is unfortunately not the only case that the Supreme Court may take. It is the only case they have taken so far this term on this, but there are a few others I just want to put on your radar.

The first, Allen v. Milligan. Now this may sound very familiar because Allen v.

Milligan was a case out of Alabama. Also my law firm represented black voters there who struck down, in that case, the Alabama map. Very similar claims to Louisiana.

Very similar results. The creation of a second Black Opportunity District as a result of that case. That case went to the Supreme Court, and the Supreme Court in that case upheld the decision below.

In that case, the Supreme Court stood by the Voting Rights Act, which is part of why I say, don't say all is lost. All is not lost. We won that case in Alabama.

We have won a lot of cases in the Supreme Court for voting rights. Doesn't mean it's going to keep happening. Doesn't mean I'm not realistic, but you know, that case in Alabama went to the Supreme Court three years ago.

As a result, in 2024, black Alabamians elected two rather than one candidate of choice. And unfortunately now, that case is now in the wake of what's going on in Louisiana. That is now traveling a similar road back to the U.S. Supreme Court, where they are also trying to gut the Voting Rights Act. Here, they're trying to say, among other things, that there is no private right of action for plaintiffs to even bring claims under the Voting Rights Act. That's right. They would say that the only people who could bring claims to vindicate the Voting Rights Act is the Department of Justice.

Not black voters. Not Native American voters, where they're discriminated against. Not Hispanic voters in Texas, where they're discriminated against.

Literally, we'd be left to Harmeet Dillon and Pam Bondi. Well, saying there's no private right of action, you might as well just say there is no Voting Rights Act. It's a convenient way to achieve the same result, because private lawyers, private plaintiffs, private groups of African-American voters, the NAACP, Moldov, civil rights organizations, no one could enforce this law other than the Department of Justice, which honestly, even under the Garland tenure, didn't bring that many Voting Rights Act claims.

It is really the private bar and the private civil rights groups and the private plaintiffs who have been carrying the load for decades for enforcement of the Voting Rights Act. So saying that there's no private right of action would be devastating. Now, that is only one of several claims in the Alabama case.

There are similar cases that are pending also out of the 8th Circuit, Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians v. Howe, and also a case out of Mississippi, the Mississippi NAACP v. State Board of Elections, all of which, in one form or another, are seeking review in the U.S. Supreme Court to deal with this question of whether or not there are private rights of action. This is as important an issue as any when it comes to the Voting Rights Act. Now, the Supreme Court may take those cases. They may not take those cases.

They may not need to take those cases at all if they, in the Louisiana case, strike down Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. But we need to be watching all of them holistically, because if we lose any one of them, democracy is in a really hard spot. If we lose any one of them, the losers will be the minority voting community that has counted on Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act to protect them since 1965, only to watch those protections grow stronger in 1982 and in 2006, and to watch as they have been chipped away by the Supreme Court and a Republican Party that no longer is committed to voting rights at all ever since.

So we need to pay really, really careful attention to these cases. Now, I promised you at the outset of the video that if you watched to the end, and we're not at the end, but if you watched to the end, you would hear about a case that I'm arguing in the Supreme Court. And so that is the third case that I want to highlight, or the third area of cases that I want to highlight.

This is a case, National Republican Senatorial Committee versus Federal Election Commission. Now, normally I don't talk a lot about campaign finance cases on these videos. Campaign finance cases are kind of a little wonkier.

They're more administrative law. They're not directly voting rights, but they deal with the question of elections and the rules for elections. And since this is a case that I personally will be arguing in the U.S. Supreme Court, I wanted to talk to you about it and talk a little bit about why it's important and what it is like to argue in the Supreme Court. So just first, a little background on the case itself. This is the latest effort by the Republican Party to undermine campaign finance laws. It is in particular the latest effort by the Republican Party to strike down a particular kind of campaign finance law that they have been trying to strike down literally my entire legal career.

So among other limitations in our federal campaign finance laws are limits on how much money national political parties and state political parties can spend in full coordination with their candidates. So look, the Democratic Party and the Republican Party, they can run as many independent expenditures as they want. Those are unlimited.

There is nothing that Congress can do to prevent them from running an unlimited number, for example, of television ads advocating for the election of their candidates. What these limits go to is how much can political parties spend where they are coordinating those spending activities with their candidates. So if the Republican Party wants to run an ad, you know, touting the achievements of one of its Senate candidates, and it does not coordinate with Senate candidates, then it can do that unlimited.

But if it wants to work hand in glove with the Senate campaign that is benefiting from that ad, there are dollar limits on how much it can spend. And this is a really big deal in the area of campaign finance. And I'm going to set aside all of the wonky reasons why a loss in this case could unravel a whole bunch of other things in the campaign finance system.

But just take my word for it. There is a reason why the Republican Party have been trying to strike down these limits, literally for my entire legal career. Now, when I say literally for my entire legal career, that's because the first time the Republican Party challenged these limits involved a Senate race in Colorado in the mid-1980s.

Now, that case wound up going to the U.S. Supreme Court, challenging these limits in the mid-1990s. Like the first time my name ever appeared on a brief in the U.S. Supreme Court was in a brief filed by the Democratic Party opposing what the Colorado Republican Party, who was the named plaintiff there, was trying to do, which was to strike down these same limits. In that case, the Supreme Court did not give Republicans what they wanted.

They sort of sidestepped the issue. And so what happened next is they came back. And in the early 2000s, there was another case called Colorado Republican 2.

It was yet again, another case involving a Senate race out of Colorado to try to strike down these limits, to say that parties, the National Republican Senatorial Committee, the Republican Party of Colorado, could spend an unlimited amount of money in coordination with their candidates. And they lost. This time they lost outright.

The Supreme Court said, nope, you're wrong. Those limits are in place. So here we are now, 2025, the National Republican Senatorial Committee, which is the part of the Republican Party that focuses on Senate races.

They are again bringing this claim, again looking to strike down these limits. But this time something different happened. And I'm telling you this history because it's really important for people to understand the role that lawyers are playing in the pro-democracy movement.

Not just me, but others. But in this case, it involves me. And what happened is that the Department of Justice said, we're not going to defend the law.

That's right. I mean, this law, which was passed in the early 1970s, which the Department of Justice has defended over and over and over again, I mean, at least a half-dozen times, it has basically said that this law is constitutional. In two of those cases, as I point out, that was the only issue in the case.

Under Republican presidents and Democratic presidents, they have defended this law, and which the Supreme Court has upheld as constitutional. Now the Trump Justice Department says, oh, you know what? It turns out we've been wrong all along.

This law that has been upheld by the Supreme Court that we, the Department of Justice, have defended, it turns out it's unconstitutional, violates the First Amendment. We agree with the Republican Party plaintiffs bringing this case. So as soon as that happened, I and my clients, the Democratic National Committee, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, we jumped in and said, look, we'll defend the law.

But if everyone else thinks this law is unconstitutional, including now Trump's Department of Justice and the Republican Party, and by the way, J.D. Vance is a plaintiff in the case, if they're all saying it's unconstitutional, we will jump into this case and we will defend this law as if we are responsible for that. It should be the Department of Justice and the Federal Election Commission, but they've all flipped sides, so we're going to defend it. So that is how I wound up in the position of preparing to argue my next case in the U.S. Supreme Court. I have argued four cases in the Supreme Court already in my career. I am 4-0, so I've won all four. All four of those have been voting cases, so this will be the first time I've argued a campaign finance case.

Those all involved redistricting cases, and I won all four of those, this will be a campaign finance case. But for those of you who don't know me, I began my career as a campaign finance lawyer. I am well known in those circles as one of the leading lawyers in that area of the law, particularly for the Democratic Party, so I'm very comfortable arguing and litigating in the campaign finance arena.

But I am at the beginning of that journey of preparing for an argument that will be in December. There is a lot of work that goes into preparing to argue in the Supreme Court. It is not like arguing in any other court.

It is particularly a lot of work to argue a case in the Supreme Court where the stakes are so high. You really feel that burden of the weight of so many people counting on you to do the best job you can because the stakes are so high. I felt that burden when I argued in redistricting cases where I felt like I had the weight of voters, particularly minority voters, on my shoulders to argue those cases and do the best job I can.

I feel that in some sense even more with this case because it involves literally the entire campaign finance system and Republican efforts to undermine it because they want to win elections in 2026, and you know how important I think that is. So we're going to have more to say in the future and at Democracy Docket in my writings and in future videos about that Supreme Court case that is coming up and also the possibility that there will be others that come up this term, including, by the way, that Mississippi case I mentioned where we also have intervened and are in that case. So we'll see if that case goes to the Supreme Court.

We'd have obviously more to say about that as well. But the best way to stay informed about all of this, what's happening in Louisiana, which is critically important, what's happening in the attacks to voting by mail, right, which is the long-term agenda of Donald Trump. It is how he thinks he's going to win in 2026 is by throwing out all these ballots.

And also in this campaign finance case that the Republican Party has brought that I'm going to be on the front lines of, we're going to have more of that in the days and weeks and months to come. But the thing you can do for me right now is you can like this video. You can subscribe to this channel.

You can hit that bell to make sure you are kept informed every time we post new content.