[Marc Elias]
For decades, the Supreme Court has quietly been rewriting the rules of American democracy. And that unchecked power, well, it's reaching a breaking point. I'm joined by Harvard Law Professor Nicholas Bowie.

He's a historian of democracy and one of the leading constitutional scholars in this country. His work exposes how the modern court, fueled by Republican long-term strategy and a Federalist Society pipeline, has been interpreting the Constitution to the detriment of American voters and democracy. In this conversation, he explains how the court ended up with this power and what we can all do to stand up to it and fight back.

But first, subscribe to this channel to stay informed about how you can defend democracy. Nicholas Bowie, welcome to Defending Democracy. Thanks so much for having me.

You've caught me at a good time. I just finished arguing a case in the U.S. Supreme Court involving campaign finance laws and Congress's ability to regulate. And in addition to being a constitutional law scholar and a professor, you also clerked on the U.S. Supreme Court. So I'm going to start with sort of a question that I've been asked a lot about and I'll ask you about. In the area of voting rights, we are watching the Supreme Court perhaps at least considering throwing out, you know, 60 or 70 years of voting rights laws and precedent in the area of campaign finance. It was defending a law that was put on the books in the mid-1970s.

We've seen this with a recent case argued involving the FTC, a precedent that I think goes back 90 years or close to 90 years, involving independent agencies. Taking a step back with a broader lens, what is the Supreme Court doing right now? Is it just dismantling the constitutional law that we've all come to understand?

Is there a rhyme or reason to it? Is the idea of stare decisis precedent, is that just like no longer a thing? How do you assess what the Supreme Court is doing?

[Nikolas Bowie]
I think that the Supreme Court, or at least six members of the Supreme Court, are trying to redesign the country in an image that they think is best. And it reflects the hubris of six lawyers who have looked at U.S. history and the Constitution and concluded that we've just been doing a lot of things wrong for the last several decades. That the laws that Congress passed to remedy problems of corruption and politics, of ensuring that people have the right to vote and access to the ballot, of just making democracy fair, don't work.

And that the court alone has the best idea of what our democracy, or whatever the country looks like going forward, should be. I think one just basic point to make about the recent cases is the United States Constitution just does not say very much about many things, but especially these matters. And what it does say is pretty basic.

So the 14th Amendment prohibits states from depriving people of the equal protection of the laws. And Article I of the Constitution empowers Congress to enact necessary and proper laws for carrying into execution its various powers. And those powers include things like being able to provide for the general welfare, or regulate commerce, or ensure that the rest of the federal government can operate.

And so over the last 200 years, majorities of Congress have looked at this text, and they've concluded, we think that the general welfare is best promoted. We think that it's necessary and proper. We think it's appropriate to create a system in which ordinary people have the right to vote.

They have the ability to go to the ballot. The ballot is protected. That large corporations should not be able to dominate elections.

That there should be spending limits on the amount of money that the wealthy or that corporations can spend. That states shouldn't be able to enact all sorts of weird rules to prevent people from voting. And they've concluded that these are consistent with the First Amendment, consistent with the Constitution.

Presidents have signed off on them. Courts have approved them. And so there are just hundreds of people who have thought about these laws that the court is currently evaluating, and thought, all of these laws are fine to us.

They work. They make our democracy function. And we currently have six people on the court who are looking at all of that work and saying, actually, we disagree.

And because we are on the Supreme Court, we have the ability to disagree, and we're going to dismantle every structure that has worked so far in order to make something that may or may not work as even the justices intend.

[Marc Elias]
So what I don't understand, and I think this may be generational. So I graduated law school in 1993. I went to Duke University Law School, which at the time was, I would say, center left.

But it had a conservative streak to it. I mean, Ken Starr had been a graduate. Richard Nixon was a graduate of Duke Law School.

And so I took very seriously what I was hearing from the conservative movement at that time, which, again, I grant you was 30 years ago. But what I was largely hearing from them and from the Federalist Society, which was very active at Duke at the time, was a sense that judges were too activist, that they were inserting their views on what is the best course for Congress. And they really saw the role of the courts in quite a constrained way.

How did we wind up in a world in the court is like revisiting this, but also sort of engaging in social science?

[Nikolas Bowie]
I think there's actually a consistent thread for the conservative legal movement, dating back at least to Brown. And it gets at two things that courts do. So one thing that federal courts do is they enforce federal law.

And they might enforce federal law against a president or an executive agency that is allegedly violating it. So if an agency goes off the rails and does something wacky, then a court might enforce federal law to restrain the agency or restrain the president. And same with states.

If a state is violating federal law, a court might enforce the Civil Rights Act or the Voting Rights Act to stop the state. That's one bucket that the court does. It enforces federal law.

Another bucket of cases that the Supreme Court has really seized for itself is the power to defy federal law, to say, actually, we think that this federal law is unconstitutional. We're going to invalidate it or decline to enforce it or strike it down. That's horizontal review.

The court horizontally reviewing an act of Congress and deciding whether to enforce it. When a court enforces federal law and engages in something more like vertical review, it's looking at all the people under federal law and asking, are you complying with it? So horizontal review, vertical review.

As far as the conservative legal movement is concerned, the U.S. Supreme Court and the federal courts have long engaged in too much vertical review and too little horizontal review. So dating back to Brown and through the Civil Rights period and into the 1970s, one of the big consistent complaints from people like Robert Bork or Antonin Scalia, other people associated with the conservative legal movement, is federal courts are engaged in too much review of state legislation. States need to be able to decide whether or not to engage in busing and desegregating schools.

States need to be able to decide whether abortion is legal or not. States need all of this freedom and autonomy to basically do whatever they want. But when it comes to Congress, their position was Congress is too powerful.

Congress is a threat. Congress does bad things like enact the Voting Rights Act or Civil Rights Act or other kind of laws that police what states do. And so the real consistent thread has been federal courts should not be in the business of policing everything that states do, but federal courts very much should be in the business of restraining Congress with respect to the president, restraining Congress with respect to states.

In other words, taking laws like the Civil Rights Act or Voting Rights Act and really narrowing them or invalidating them. In 1982, when Congress was voting on whether to reauthorize the Voting Rights Act, as you know, John Roberts was a member of the Reagan administration who thought this new Voting Rights Act is too powerful. It appears to disregard prior Supreme Court cases.

It would be a real interference with the state. Congress should not pass it. He was unsuccessful at restraining it.

But it looks like now that he's a justice on the court, he's just going to revisit what he thought 40 years ago and thought, you know, I was right then. Now I'm a chief justice. I'm going to make that the law of the land by virtue of my vote on the Supreme Court.

And so I think that that through line is really important to distinguish because conservatives have long said they don't like judicial activism. But what they mean is they don't want to enforce federal authority against states unless it's with kind of new things like gun rights or religious liberty that conservative judges now care about. But they have never really thought the court should not police Congress.

And that is what the courts are in fact doing a lot right now.

[Marc Elias]
I got to ask you a bunch of follow ups to this, because it touches on my frustrations and questions right now about the Supreme Court. I am pretty sure, though I am not an expert, you are on the passage of the 13th, 14th and 15th amendments. I'm pretty confident that the Congress that enacted them in the wake of the bloodiest civil war in American history was not all that worried about stepping on the rights of Southern states.

How do we wind up with these principles of like, you know, equal dignity? Like, where did that come from? Like, where does this where is this proportional right with the other for congruence and portion of like, where do any of these concepts come from, from an original standpoint, because clearly the purpose of the 13th, 14th, 15th amendment was to effectuate voting rights and equal civil rights for the freed, the newly freed slaves at the expense of the Southern states.

[Nikolas Bowie]
Yeah, you're totally right. And I think there's two ways of answering that. So one is what happened.

And you're right that when Congress passed the 14th amendment, in particular, Congress was at the time concerned that Southern states were just blatantly discriminating against black people in their jurisdictions that they were creating new laws that applied only to certain people that that they're being bigoted and awful. Congress passed the 14th amendment in part to restrain that activity. And Southern states didn't want to ratify the 14th amendment.

And when Congress passed the 14th amendment in 1866, the following year, it enacted the Reconstruction Acts, the first of which basically required Southern states, look, if you want to resume sending representatives to Congress, here's what you need to do. You need to create new state constitutions. You need to ensure that black people can vote.

We want to review those state constitutions. And only then can you resend people into Congress. And it's really hard to imagine just like a more sort of aggressive federal policing on what states are doing.

And when states didn't ratify the 14th amendment, Congress added, and we want to see you ratify the 14th amendment. So Congress was very aggressive about, you know, here is our vision for multiracial democracy. We see states that are not going along with us.

We are going to target those states. We are going to regulate them and supervise them until they cooperate. And treating that as a precedent, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, 100 years later, looks very tame.

Because all that law is doing is saying, if you want to change your voting laws in the future, you need to have it reviewed by a federal agency or a federal court, or at the very least, you cannot discriminate against people on the basis of race, whether for purpose or your effect to doing so. What happened with originalism? Like, why do originalists say something different?

I think part of that has to do with the history of originalism. So I'm co-authoring a book with my colleague at Harvard Law School, Daphne Renan. It's called Supremacy, How Rule by the Court Replaced Government by the People.

It will come out next summer. And the book is a history of this idea of judicial supremacy. How did the American people come to believe that the US Supreme Court should have the final say on what the Constitution means?

And for most of US history, many people did not think that at all. But in the 1960s, when Congress was passing legislation to enfranchise Southerners and to protect civil rights, it often did so by either narrowing or otherwise trying to override really bad Supreme Court decisions. So the most notable example with the Voting Rights Act is in the 1950s, the US Supreme Court looked at literacy tests and said, we think literacy tests are consistent with the 15th Amendment.

The 15th Amendment also empowers Congress to enact appropriate legislation to enforce its terms. Congress looked at the 15th Amendment and said, we do not think that literacy tests are consistent with protecting the right to vote. We're going to outlaw literacy tests.

So there was real tension there between what the US Supreme Court had said and what Congress was doing. And so for some conservatives who opposed the Voting Rights Act, one of whom was named Alfred Evans, who was a sort of itinerant law professor who wrote an article basically saying that every federal law that Congress passed in the 1960s was unconstitutional. Part of his argument was this violates the original spirit of the 15th Amendment that the US Supreme Court outlined in that prior case and that Congress is defying.

He also said the same thing about the Voting Rights Act. In fact, he made an argument that, I mean, I'm sorry, the Civil Rights Act, he said the Civil Rights Act violated the original intent of the 13th Amendment because the 13th Amendment banned slavery and involuntary servitude. And when Congress passed the Civil Rights Act, it prohibited businesses from discriminating on the basis of race.

So it was requiring businesses to cater to black customers. And so Evans's position was this violates the original intent of the 13th Amendment, which is to stop government from telling businesses or employers who they must hire or who they must work for. So he developed this jurisprudence in his scholarship, saying that the original intent of the authors of the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendment just was against everything that Congress was doing in the 1960s.

[Marc Elias]
So you pointed to something that I left out of my outrage that I find just so weird, which is that both the 14th and the 15th Amendments expressly give Congress, like expressly, like you don't have to rely on the general power of Congress, right, expressly give Congress the authority to enact legislation to effectuate them. And that seems to have turned into a balancing test by the Supreme Court. And I'm curious why they think that's a balancing test and whether that, you know, whether that has any historical support.

I'll be right back with Professor Nicholas Bowie in a moment. But, you know, Republicans are trying to rig the midterm elections for Republicans, but Democrats are fighting back and our democracy is at a tipping point. The Democracy Ducket team is growing to meet this moment, but it needs your help to hold Donald Trump and the Republicans accountable.

For just $10 a month, you'll gain access to exclusive events, insights from me and much, much more. Become a premium member now by clicking on the link in the description below.

[Nikolas Bowie]
Imagine you're in Congress in 1865 or 1866 when Congress passed the 13th and 14th Amendments. So you've just won the Civil War. Congratulations.

You want to abolish slavery, guarantee equality, create the beginnings of a multiracial democracy. But there are a bunch of states in the South in which the former Confederate leaders still have a lot of influence and are either enacting laws or otherwise restraining people from being able to vote. At the same time, federal courts are not an ally.

So Chief Justice Roger Taney or Taney had just died in 1864, but his most notable opinion from 1857 was Dred Scott versus Stanford, in which the Taney Court held that Congress lacked the power to ban the spread of slavery. For Republicans in Congress at the time, there was just nothing worse than Dred Scott, not only for what it held, but also for the idea that the court was going to police what Congress had done. The court had never disagreed with Congress about the meaning of the Constitution before until Dred Scott.

And so for Republicans in Congress, that was just anathema. And so when Congress passed the 13th and 14th Amendments, they did not think the only people who should be in charge of determining what this means are courts. They distrusted courts.

They thought courts are potentially very dangerous. At the same time, they thought courts could be very useful for ensuring that states cooperated with federal authority. So the 13th and 14th Amendments and then the 15th Amendment later all included provisions at the top that said, here's what we want to happen.

We want slavery abolished. We want the equal protection of the laws. We want voting rights.

And Congress shall enforce these provisions with appropriate legislation. And what appropriate legislation meant was, you know, anything that Congress thinks is necessary and proper for carrying this into effect. And so Congress in the 1870s then passed a bunch of legislation to enforce those provisions.

It enacted the first Voting Rights Act. It enacted laws that regulated elections in the states. It passed laws that banned things like lynching and other forms of terrorism and political violence.

But then the US Supreme Court, when it reviewed these laws in the mid-1870s and 1880s, was very skeptical and began to invalidate a lot of these same laws. And at first, Congress attempted to defend this legislation from the court, but by the 1880s, Congress no longer had the majority capable of doing so. And so the court started striking down these laws saying, these are not appropriate legislation.

We get to define what we mean by appropriate, and what is appropriate is just different than what the Congress that wrote these amendments think. So you might have written this amendment, and you might have included in the text of that amendment, we can enforce this with appropriate legislation. And the court said, actually, we the justices get to determine what is appropriate.

And so that was really the beginning of these sorts of tests. Because the court started striking down all of this legislation, it gave rise to the Jim Crow era in which states were just blatantly discriminating and disenfranchising black people. It took another hundred years before Congress passed another law, even similar to the Reconstruction period with like the Civil Rights Act and Voting Rights Act of 1964 and 1965.

And when the court reviewed that law, it was a much more liberal court that deferred to Congress. But what we're seeing with the current court under Chief Justice Roberts is basically returned to that Reconstruction era, in which the court looks at what Congress has done and says, we don't think that this is appropriate. We know what is appropriate.

What is appropriate is what we think. But what members of Congress think is just irrelevant to us.

[Marc Elias]
Maybe you can help me out here, because in the in the midst of preparing for my Supreme Court argument, as you know, large undertaking, you look at a lot of law, not just the law that is directly applicable to your case, but anything that might come up. And in the course of the amicus briefs that were filed, several conservative briefs were filed that said that the campaign finance laws should be struck down because they are not part of the history and tradition of what the First Amendment meant at the time that it was enacted. I sort of tracked through their citations to a case involving, I think, called McDonald that was in Chicago that involved guns, and then to another case, I think, in Washington, D.C. called Heller that involved guns. And I came across this passage that said you shouldn't have second-tier constitutional rights and that it is no protection for a constitutional right to entrust it to judges to balance things in future cases, that that is no protection at all. And I thought, well, this is really interesting to me, because one of the places where courts are constantly balancing rights are voting rights, right, under the prevailing what's called the Anderson-Burdick test. In fact, that's what the Supreme Court is said to do, is you balance the burden on the right to vote from the voter against the state's interest.

And there are all kinds of balancing tests that the court has embraced in the area of voting rights and civil rights. What am I missing here? Why is it no protection of constitutional rights at all when it is gun rights to have courts balance these things?

But when it comes to voting, the court seems fine with balancing tests.

[Nikolas Bowie]
There's a sort of inside baseball way of looking at this and an external way, just like a normal person way of looking at it. I think the inside baseball, so like let's get in the mind of the justices. For someone like Clarence Thomas, who wrote that language in McDonald, his language is getting at the idea that the Constitution, when it was drafted, was itself a balancing test.

There were people on both sides of various issues, and the Constitution represented a compromise, and it included things like the Second Amendment, which guarantees the right to bear arms, and the 14th Amendment, which guarantees equal protection. And that that is the balance. And so it is the role of courts to do nothing more but just enforce that as an absolute measure.

And if they were to enforce this as an absolute measure, then things would be good. And he thinks there are some exceptions to when courts should enforce that, when laws are consistent with history and tradition, in which case the court can uphold a law despite this absolute ban. And so taking just one step back, I think one virtue of that kind of test for someone like Thomas or other conservatives on the court is it creates an appearance of objectivity.

All we are doing is enforcing this absolute text that means something that everyone can agree upon. And the only question is, are these exceptions consistent with history, which is objective, and tradition, which everyone knows about? And it theoretically minimizes the role of judges to just kind of check boxes or look through history and decide what's good.

What's really pernicious about this line of doctrine is, and I can speak to this as a historian who has a PhD in history, is there is no objective history. We can barely reach an objective story about what happened in the 2024 election on the details, much less a history of what is American tradition or what kinds of laws are consistent with a kind of text. So not only is what is history subjective in some sense, in that it requires kind of figuring out nuance and contingency, but also the test itself is untethered from any kind of objective standard.

So in the context of gun rights, for example, what the court says it's doing is it's asking, is this law analogous to a law that existed 200 years ago? And if so, then we will uphold it, if not, we will strike it down if it regulates gun rights. But when it comes to what is analogous, you can define that at a really high level of generality and say, well, there were lots of laws that protected safety.

There were lots of laws that tried to keep people and kids safe in schools. There are tons of laws that tried to prevent really dangerous things from happening. But there were no laws that regulated AK-47s.

There were no laws that regulated automatic weapons or semi-automatic weapons. And so depending on your level of generality, that can help dictate the outcome. When the court is also looking for laws, it's also ignoring every other element of American tradition.

And you just need to turn on a TV to tell that U.S. tradition is much broader than what appears in some state statute book. It's extremely broad. But the court's understanding of what kind of evidence it allows and what kind of evidence it doesn't is super discretionary.

So I think what I read into that test in here is the court does not like the sorts of balancing tests that prior judges have used that have upheld laws the court doesn't like and have struck down laws the court does like. And what it wants is a more secretive balancing test or a more secret form of discretion so that the current justices can strike down the laws they don't like and uphold the laws that they do. Either way, what the court's doing is just trying to strike down the laws it doesn't like, which at this point just means, what do six justices in the current court not want to see?

[Marc Elias]
So if the court was to adopt this theory, which it's not going to, I don't think, anytime soon in the campaign finance arena, I kind of had two reactions. The first is that the Constitution is filled with concerns about corruption. They weren't worried about campaign contributions.

But I guess this gets to your point about, like, I'm operating at one level of what I think, what was the concern at the time of the founding. I'm at one level and I guess they would say yes, but there was not a particular limit, you know, on the amount of money that parties could spend in politics. The second thing is, you know, the founders hated parties.

I mean, you know, so like I'm standing in the Supreme Court and I'm thinking, I'm listening to a whole lot of stuff about how important parties are from people who usually argue about originalism or history and tradition. There was no history or tradition of political parties. In fact, Madison and Hamilton and Jay in the Federalist Papers wrote, you know, when they talk about factions, what they are talking about was a risk of political parties.

I kind of find myself having this dissonance in trying to follow kind of like how this is not just outcome determinative thinking.

[Nikolas Bowie]
Yeah. And this gets back to the point, though, about how the U.S. Constitution just doesn't say very much. And so ultimately what's happening in any sort of voting rights case is the court is at most interpreting like 12 words, maybe a couple dozen words.

But these are words like appropriate legislation that have just been interpreted and debated and voted on over and over, over time. And what the court is effectively saying is we just do not care what millions of Americans have said this language means. We do not care that, you know, 130 years ago or 100 years ago, when Americans were facing crises of democracy with huge corporations as dominating elections or otherwise influencing what politicians thought and did, when Congress did something about it, we just don't think that their problem solving is relevant to our interpretation of what counts as appropriate.

And I think that's a really important point to emphasize, because so many people today look at Congress and think this is a broken institution. You know, they're afraid of power. They're sitting on their hands.

They're looking at, you know, the president like murder people in the Caribbean and thinking, what are we supposed to do about it? It's full of cowards. And they think Congress is broken.

If only Congress would do more, a lot of our pathologies would go away. But our current Congress is an institution shaped by the U.S. Supreme Court. The current Congress was worried about corruption.

So it passed laws after Watergate, and it passed laws during the robber baron era that tried to curb corruption. In Buckley v. DeLeo, which you mentioned, in Citizens United, in Shelby County, in all of these cases, the Supreme Court struck those laws down.

Congress was concerned about its ability to police an overbearing president. The U.S. Supreme Court has struck those laws down. It looks poised to strike even more laws down this term.

Congress was worried about its own expertise. And so it built independent agencies and other agencies to support it. The U.S. Supreme Court is going to cut those sorts of assistance down and put them all under the umbrella of just whatever the president wants. So the Congress that we have now is broken, but it's been broken by these justices creating these, you know, tests out of nowhere that are ignoring what prior Congresses have done, trying to create this vision of what it thinks James Madison may have wanted. And it's reducing our country to ashes because the kinds of legislative compromises that a democracy needs in order to function keep getting undermined by the votes of five or six justices.

[Marc Elias]
A few years ago, there were limits on the total amount of money that an individual could give to all party committees and all candidates. They were known as the aggregate limits. And those were challenged in a case called McCutcheon v.

Federal Election Commission. In that case, what the conservative majority said is, look, we don't have to worry. We don't need these aggregate limits because the fear that donors will give lots of money to lots of different parties and that that money will then get aggregated to the national party and then spent on advertising or other expenditures to benefit candidates.

You don't have to worry about that because there are these other restrictions on the amount of money that parties can spend on their candidates in coordination. So we don't need to police the money in because we can essentially police the money out. Now I'm in the Supreme Court a couple of days ago, a few days ago, arguing to defend those limits on the money out.

There was a suggestion like, wait a second. We were told that you didn't need this first limit because you had the second limit. And now the second limits.

And next, they're just going to go after the contribution limits at all. And they'll say, well, now they're saying, well, you don't need to worry about it because there are still these base contribution limits. When they come to the base contribution limits, they just move from one thing to the other rather than sort of viewing this holistically.

When Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act was struck down in Shelby County, one of the things that the Chief Justice wrote, I thought quite passionately, we'll see, was don't worry because there's still a nationwide ban, a nationwide ban on discrimination and voting in Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. So the fact that Section 5 is being struck down and its requirements of preclearance and other things with respect to just these some states, these southern states and some other places, don't worry because people policing voting rights and protecting the rights of minority voters still have this nationwide ban. And now we're all awaiting a decision on that nationwide ban being potentially struck down.

So I mean, I want to put my, I want to be fair here. I assume that what the conservatives would say is, look, is we just decide the case in front of us. So it's not like we're, it's not like we, you know, we're just, we're just having this case in front of us.

You can't ignore the fact that you made these other rulings on the assumption that these things would be in place. Is that a fair criticism or is that, or are the conservatives right that they're just like, they're just call it, they're just deciding the case in front of them?

[Nikolas Bowie]
I think that you're right that the court is on one hand deciding the case in front of it. But of course, each justice also has their own vision of what they want the government to look like. And each case is an opportunity for the justices to move closer toward that vision.

Again, for me, this gets to the fundamental problem of giving five or nine people the final say on what the constitution means, because if they make a mistake or if they do something that's wrong, or they make a assumption that turns out not to be true, there's nothing that we can do about it so long as we give them this authority to decide what the constitution means. And so there are lots of examples that you're describing in which, you know, the court has in the past said, you know, we're not doing, you know, we're doing this one thing, but we're not doing anything else. So don't worry about the other thing.

But once that other thing comes to pass, the court says, actually, we don't like that either. So one example is just with the child labor in the 1920s. So Congress passed a ban on child labor because individual states were unable to create a nationwide ban themselves.

Some states just were profiting too much from being able to allow big companies to hire however many children they wanted. So Congress banned the practice. The Supreme Court said Congress's power under the Commerce Clause is extensive, but it's not like the Taxing Clause, which is very broad.

Congress's power under the Commerce Clause is extensive, but not that extensive, and Congress cannot use it to ban child labor nationwide. Manufacturing is different from commerce. Try again, Congress.

So immediately, some people in Congress thought, we need to do something about the court. We need to regulate the court. But the compromise position was, let's just repass this law as a tax.

So Congress imposed this very punitive tax on child labor and said, if you're manufacturing things with child labor, now you're subject to an enormous tax. And the Supreme Court looked at that and said, we don't like that either. And if we allow Congress to ban child labor with a tax, then Congress will just use its taxing power to do all sorts of stuff.

We need to strike that down too. Today, the court does much the same thing where it has this vision of what the government should look like. And to the extent that Congress or anyone else really is betraying or violating that vision, the court will come up with whatever explanation it needs for why this particular application is no good.

But that really just doesn't say very much about once the next case or the next case comes. And I think in the aftermath of Shelby County, this came up quite a bit because once Democrats took control of Congress, so Shelby County was in 2013. Once Democrats took control of Congress, there was this question of, well, can we reauthorize the Voting Rights Act?

Can we try to satisfy the Supreme Court's test from Shelby County and enact another version of preclearance that existed from 1965 through 2013? And a lot of senators, I think, appropriately worried, well, the court did say we could do this, but we all know that if we were to attempt to do this, the court would probably strike it down. And is this the kind of thing we want to use our political capital on?

Spending it on this kind of bill that's very hard to enact only to see the court strike it down. And that's just like a very dangerous thing that happens over and over. So I think you're right that just because the court itself is not bound by its own precedent, as we've seen over and over again, the court can turn a holding of nine justices and say, actually, that is one minor exception to the general rule that was embraced by a single dissenter years later.

The court can do whatever it wants so long as it's in charge. And so as long as we live under this system in which the court majority can determine what the Constitution means, the Constitution only means what five judges currently say it means, which may be very different from what those same justices said two years ago.

[Marc Elias]
So we've talked a lot about the problems. You're writing a book on this subject, and I look forward to reading it. But what do you recommend that people do about it?

What is the solution? What can Congress do? What should the courts do?

Is there a solution, or are we trapped in this sort of doom loop? No, I don't think we're trapped.

[Nikolas Bowie]
I think there are solutions. But I think a lot of the solutions are cultural and relate to what we expect of our democracy. A lot of the book takes place and focuses on the mid-19th century, a long time ago.

But the story begins really with Dred Scott versus Sanford in 1857, in which the Supreme Court said Congress can't ban the spread of slavery. So one way in which people could have reacted to that opinion is, dang, that's too bad. I wish Congress could ban the spread of slavery, but it turns out the US Supreme Court has said we can't.

I guess abolition is over. We'll just have to wait.

[Marc Elias]
We thought we had a flag, but no luck.

[Nikolas Bowie]
Yeah, that could have been the reaction. In fact, that's what the president at the time, James Buchanan, said. He was like, I hope everyone cheerfully submits to what the court has just said, or what the court is about to say.

But the entire Republican Party, the party was built around the premise that Congress can ban the spread of slavery. And so they were not going to accept this opinion of the justices that Congress lacked this power. So Republicans ran in 1858 and in 1860 on platforms of Dred Scott does not control us.

We, the people, get to determine what the Constitution means. We, the people, can elect a Congress that can ban slavery despite what the court has said. The court is not all powerful.

It does not get to determine what the Constitution means. We do. You do.

I do. Voters do by electing members of Congress and presidents who can do something about it. And so two years after Abraham Lincoln was elected, Congress passed a law that banned the spread of slavery in federal territory.

This was years before the 13th Amendment. It was without modifying the court's power. It was just a cultural rejection of what Dred Scott stood for, which was both in substance of protection of slavery, but also procedurally an attempt by the court to police what the American people could do.

During Reconstruction, when it appeared that the U.S. Supreme Court might be skeptical of Congress's Reconstruction statutes, so when Congress tried to require states to adopt these new multiracial constitutions, the Congress just stripped the court of jurisdiction to hear a case in which it looked like the court might try to invalidate or second-guess one of those laws. Congress has changed the number of justices on the court. When it looked like a hostile president was going to appoint another justice who was opposed to Reconstruction, Congress reduced the number of justices on the court.

Once Andrew Johnson was no longer president, it raised the number so that Grant could appoint two new people. Everything that the courts do is subject to federal law. The court's power to issue writs and orders and injunctions all come from things like the Judiciary Act, the court's ability to hire clerks, the court's ability to, you know, the justices' ability to go to Europe over the summer and, you know, engage in whatever kind of vacation for pay they do every year.

That's a product of federal law allowing it. And if we do not like what the court is saying about the Constitution, we have the power to do something about it by just regulating the court, by taking away the powers the court is exercising that we don't think it should be able to exercise. And I should say in this current moment, lower court judges are doing a great job.

The typical lower court judge is like really earnestly trying to determine what does federal law mean. They're looking at what the executive branch is doing and saying, we think that they're violating it or we think that they're applying it accurately. But they're really trying a good faith effort to ensure that everyone is subject to the law.

The U.S. Supreme Court is not doing that. And so if we want the U.S. Supreme Court to function more like what the typical district judge is doing, then we can pass laws with a new Congress that can regulate the court and hold it to what we think the court should be doing. So the problem here is not constitutional, it's not legal, it's cultural.

It's what do we expect from our representatives? Do we expect them to look at a decision like Shelby County and say, I guess there's no Voting Rights Act, you know, darn. Or do we expect them to fight for our ability to participate in our democracy?

And I certainly hope that if people realize that the court's power does not come from the Constitution, it only comes from what we allow it to do, that we will reconsider all the things that the U.S. Supreme Court is currently doing.