[Marc Elias]
Donald Trump has turned the Department of Justice into his personal law firm, weaponizing it against his political opponents. And the Republicans in Congress, they're just complicit. Well, today's guest, Congressman Jamie Raskin, he's not playing ball.

He's the top Democrat on the House Judiciary Committee, and he's fighting to expose this unprecedented executive power grab. In this conversation, we talk about his explosive new letter to Attorney General Pam Bondi, DOJ's recent string of humiliating blunders, and what is going on with the Epstein files. But before we get into it, subscribe to this channel to learn how you can defend democracy.

Congressman Jamie Raskin, welcome back to Defending Democracy.

[Rep. Raskin]
I'm psyched to be with you, Mark.

[Marc Elias]
I want to give you credit for really being the first person that I ever spoke to about the separation of powers between the President and Congress and the Judiciary. To really flag something for me that I think is now one of the central themes and needs to be an even more important theme for the pro-democracy movement, and that is the idea of congressional supremacy or primacy in the separation of powers. I'll never forget, you said to me, and I've repeated it, and I've given you credit each time, that not only are there not three co-equal branches of government, but to quote you, co-equal is not even a word.

[Rep. Raskin]
It's like extremely unique or something like that.

[Marc Elias]
Since that interview, which was, frankly, before Donald Trump retook office, it was well more than a year ago, we have seen what happens when you don't have Congress jealously guarding its prerogatives, and you don't have Congress as the sort of primary branch of government. We have him engaged in a war without any declaration from Congress. He does not take care that the laws are faithfully executed.

I'm sure you can give me emoluments, probably you can give me. So talk to me, both as a member of Congress, the ranking member on the Judiciary Committee, soon to be chair next year, hopefully, but also a constitutional law professor, about the dire circumstances and the crisis I think we're in right now over the lack of congressional power vis-a-vis the executive branch.

[Rep. Raskin]
Well, I mean, this is the perfect closing lecture for a great No King's Weekend across the country. I mean, our revolution and our constitution were conceived in revolutionary insurgency against kings, against monarchs. When the Articles of Confederation were written, we didn't even have a president in there.

They didn't even want a president that was added in the constitution kind of grudgingly to say, all right, well, we're going to need somebody to take care that the laws are faithfully executed when Congress isn't around. And the executive branch is important for that reason. But it's very clear, as Madison put it in the Federalist Papers, that Congress is the predominant branch.

There's a reason it's in Article One. It's first among equals or first among co-equals. In the speech that I was giving by bullhorn or microphone, wherever I could find one over the weekend, I was quoting the preamble, right?

Starting off, we, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare and secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of liberty, do hereby ordain and establish the constitution of these United States. And then the very next sentence is the first sentence of Article One. So taking all of the sovereign power to write the constitution and proclaim the country comes into all legislative power is vested in a Congress of the United States.

And then page after page after page of powers are set forth, Mark, as you were saying, the power to declare one in Article One, Section Eight, Clause 11, which Trump has violated. The power to appropriate money and raise budgets, that's us. And he's violated it dozens of times by redirecting funds for purpose A to purpose L or Z or just blocking and impounding.

We've got the power to raise taxes, which means we've got the power to impose tariffs. A tariff is just a tax, as even his own gerrymandered Supreme Court had to tell him. Slapping down is totally unconstitutional as well as counterproductive tariffs.

And then you get to Article One, Section Eight, Clause 18 and all other powers necessary and proper to the execution of the foregoing powers, right? Then you get to Article Two, which is like this big. The most important paragraph says, the president shall be removed from office upon impeachment for and conviction of treason, bribery and other high crimes and misdemeanors, right?

If we're co-equal, why is it we've got the power to impeach and try and convict and remove him and he doesn't have the power to impeach us, right? So the president's job is to take care of the laws are faithfully executed. And it's very clear what the order of primacy is, as you put it.

[Marc Elias]
Congressman, look, I think that's a really important point. And I wanna make sure that everyone is paying attention to exactly what you just said. The fact is every day Republicans in Congress are giving Donald Trump more and more power.

And frankly, it's just not getting the kind of media coverage that it deserves, which is part of the reason why I do this podcast with guests like you. And look, Democracy Docket and independent media outlets are more important than ever. And if you out there are watching this interview and you wanna know how you can support Democracy Docket, the best thing you can do is to subscribe to its free newsletter.

Just click on the link on your screen or in the description below to sign up now. And while you're at it, also subscribe to this channel. But look, Congressman, I've got another question for you.

The president is engaged in a war in violation of Congress's power to declare war. He has imposed taxes in the form of tariffs and directed spending in violation of Congress's power there. He has not taken care to see that the laws are faithfully executed.

And I'll use a really simple example that I'm gonna wanna get your reaction to more broadly, but the Epstein files. The Epstein files was a law, Congress passed a law that said all the files are to be released by December 19th. December 19th came and went.

A few days later, Todd Blanche said, we've released a few hundred thousand and there are a few hundred thousand more coming in the next couple of weeks. That turned out not to be true. They had released 12,000 and they then estimated in early January there were 2 million coming.

The 2 million actually turned into 3 million that then turned into 6 million. Now they just decided they're not releasing the last 3 million. It just feels to me, and I don't mean to be expressing frustration at you, but to you, that Donald Trump and his administration just continue to violate almost every provision of the constitution.

[Rep. Raskin]
And now they're committing war crimes to cover up sex crimes. I mean, even the Iran war is just a distraction and an evasion from all the things that Donald Trump wants to hide in the Epstein files. Look, this is the first president, to my knowledge in American history, who never talks about the constitution, who never mentions Madison or Jefferson or Washington.

He wants to have the whole thing swallowed up in some Orwellian memory hole. They want to write their own ticket. And unfortunately, as you know better than anybody, the Roberts court has helped at certain points.

I mean, we want to praise them when they do the right thing, like in the tariffs case, but that presidential immunity decision is just dangerous as hell. And now we've got, like ICE agents walking around thinking, well, the Department of Justice won't prosecute me for anything, so I don't have to worry about that. They're not going to let the states prosecute me.

And if anything were ever to happen to me, Donald Trump would pardon me. So there's this sense of lawlessness that pervades the whole enterprise. And we need Congress to be fighting.

But I think finally, the people who've been frustrated about this are realizing that means we got to go out and win the election in November, because the Republicans are not going to do anything. Mike Johnson is just acting like, you know, the CEO of a religious cult for the cult leader.

[Marc Elias]
So I want to ask you about your letter to Pam Bondi, but before we do that, I want to close out this on Congress. Again, wearing your hat as both a scholar of the history of Congress, but also a constitutional law professor, which people don't know, they've been living under a rock. But before he was Congressman Raskin, he was Professor Raskin, an acclaimed and well-recognized expert in constitutional law.

I assume the founders would have found the current state of affairs completely, like, bizarre, right?

[Rep. Raskin]
Totally unrecognizable. You know, for one thing, they really predicted, like Madison and Federalist 10, that people serving in federal office would come to identify with their branch of government, right? So how would the framers understand the president sending a violent mob, which the kind of thing that the founders were familiar with, but a violent mob to storm the Capitol, and then you would actually have some representatives and senators not voting to hold the president accountable and liable for that.

They wouldn't understand it because there's a book to be written at some point by somebody, maybe I'll write it someday, but somebody should write a book about how the fact they didn't predict that partisanship would be such an overwhelming part of our politics. Now, you could see it from the beginning because all of the same founders who were waxing eloquent against political parties, against faction, like Madison, they themselves were involved in political parties. And so, you know, there's a difference between Madison, the constitutional founder and framer and thinker, and then Madison, the bare knuckle politician, like Jefferson and, you know, all of them pretty much.

And so that's why, you know, my basic line on this is like two cheers for partisanship. We need to get rid of some of the hypocrisy around partisanship. Nothing is more characteristic of Capitol Hill than somebody getting on the floor, deploring and denouncing partisanship, proclaiming bipartisanship, and then they're right off to their party caucus right afterwards.

So I think we need a little more intellectual honesty about it. Political parties are not a bad thing. They're a good thing.

They are a sign of oxygen in a constitutional system, because it means people have the freedom of speech. They have the freedom to assemble, to organize, and political parties play an important function. They register voters.

We help to organize public opinion. And then once we get elected, it helps to push programs, right? And we articulate a public consensus.

So what's the problem? The problem is when people elevate their party above their constitutional oath. And that was the point I was trying to make to the senators over in the Senate when we came over in the impeachment trial, the second impeachment trial of Trump.

I just said, you know, you're here on a double oath. One, as senators, you've been sworn to uphold and defend the Constitution against enemies, foreign and domestic. And two, you've sworn in the oath as jurors to render impartial justice, which means nonpartisan justice.

And we know how to do that. Anybody who runs their constituent office in the proper way knows that we will go to bat for our constituents on Social Security, Medicare, VA benefits, COVID-19 shots, whatever it is you need, we will fight for you. And we never ask what political party you belong to.

At least, you know, at least I know the Democrats don't. I don't know if it's gotten that bad over there. But I imagine most Republicans, or at least a lot of Republicans, still do it the old fashioned way, which is you don't ask about somebody's political party identification.

And that's the thing. So we've got to remember when we're elected that we weren't elected just to represent the people in our party. We got to represent everybody.

So if I'm fighting for pro-choice, I'm not just fighting for pro-choice for Democratic women, I'm fighting for all women's right to choose.

[Marc Elias]
I said that I wanted to pivot to your back and forth with Pam Bondi, who has turned out to be, if not the worst attorney general, I mean, there's a lot to compete with there. You know, Nixon, Nixon had an attorney general who was quite something, but one of the worst attorney generals of the modern era. So tell us where you stand with her.

You sent a letter. Describe what you, describe what the nature of the dispute is and kind of where we are at.

[Rep. Raskin]
They're still after Jack Smith. And one can only surmise that's because Donald Trump is still on a vendetta against him. Like the Department of Justice is just a department of Donald Trump's vendettas at this point.

Like whoever he upsets is who they're going to go after and investigate and prosecute, even if they get slapped down by federal district court judges, you know, grand juries, they just keep going. So they're still after Jack Smith. So they sent over some more information about Jack Smith in this, you know, endless vendetta project.

Well, they accidentally included in there all of this information that we might've gotten in Jack Smith's volume two of his special counsel report. Had they not blocked its release, that Trump got Judge Aileen Cannon to do that. And the DOJ has been working very hard to lock down that special counsel report.

Although, as you know, every other special counsel report for render has been made public. But anyway, but so included in there was a progress memo from a lawyer, an unknown lawyer, in Jack Smith's investigation. And we learned several things.

One, that they were, seemed to be unified around the idea that Trump had a business motive for pilfering all of those top secret government documents and taking them down to Mar-a-Lago. Two, some of them were so top secret that one of them was available for inspection only by six people in the entire U.S. government. Wow.

Five outside of the president himself. And also that Trump was extremely cavalier and promiscuous in waving these documents around and showed them to several people on an airplane that was flying someplace when he was no longer in office. And he showed some of the documents to Susie Wiles.

So those are just little snippets of a view of the larger picture. And I just wrote back and I said, you guys sent us this stuff. It's been released now through us.

We didn't, and we didn't release any top secret stuff in telling this to the public, but it's time to release volume two of the special report. Then I get Caroline Leavitt and people saying, I've got absolutely no credibility. All I do was release the document they sent to us, you know?

I don't need much credibility to release that.

[Marc Elias]
So if Democrats take control of Congress in November, right? So they would effectively take control in January, right? If Democrats win the elections in November, take control in January.

And you are now the chair of the House Judiciary Committee. Can you get that, the full Smith file? Like what is like, it would seem like Congress would have the authority to get the full special counsel report.

Isn't usually, don't the special counsels usually give the full thing to Congress or you get them and then you sometimes do hearings with the special counsel?

[Rep. Raskin]
That has always been the standard. That's always been the practice and the expectation. We've got to deal with Judge Eileen Kannon's totally lawless judicial order that this never see the light of day.

I mean, there must be some extremely explosive stuff in that volume two of his special counsel report, but we will have, put it this way, a lot more leverage to set the agenda generally with the Department of Justice to try to overstore some semblance of commitment to law and order there. But right now we see it as completely lawless and just advancing Trump's political vendetta agenda every single day.

[Marc Elias]
All right. I want to talk to you about a case that was just argued before the Supreme Court, a case that my law firm and I are involved in. This is the Mississippi case, Watson versus Republican National Committee.

The Republican National Committee sued to say that states cannot allow absentee ballots to count or mail-in ballots to count if they are postmarked by Election Day, but received a few days afterwards. Their position is that the federal Election Day law prohibits that, which seems like a ridiculous legal position. But listening to the argument, I was surprised at how many of the conservative justices seem to be playing legislator.

I mean, they were saying, well, you know, but what if a state allowed this? What if state allowed that? I kept just thinking to myself, the answer is the states are allowed to decide, right?

I mean, unless Congress tells them otherwise, the states can set the rules of elections. And that's not an accident, right? That's not a loophole.

[Rep. Raskin]
That's by design. It's exactly the way the Constitution works in Article 1, Section 4, right? The states control the time, place, manner of elections.

And Congress can regulate beyond that if we get together to do it. But, you know, I assume Congress could say if we wanted to, something we've never said, which is that you must stop counting ballots at, you know, 11, 59 and 59 seconds on the day of the election. I mean, nobody has ever seen it that way.

That's absurd and ridiculous. It reminds me of, you know, the whole major question doctor thing. They suddenly want to introduce this new doctrine.

What decades and decades or centuries after it's been interpreted in a different way and all of it in order to constrict the vote to reduce the electorate. So I was going to ask you something about that case, if I could, please. It's on my mind.

I mean, you know, at first, when I saw it, I said, this is a position so extreme they're advancing that they're suing Mississippi, which is not known as the most, you know, expansive voting rights champion state in the country. But Mississippi is defending its law saying, yeah, we're going to make sure everybody votes by Election Day. But if they come in a day or two later, whatever, we're going to count all of the ballots.

And that's generally been the law across the country. And I thought, OK, well, if Mississippi is defending it, it'll be reasonable. Then somebody suggested to me that the reason why they chose Mississippi of all the states to target is that Mississippi might not zealously fight and might, you know, be co-opted or kind of give in when it gets to, you know, the Supreme Court.

I don't just what is your sense of that?

[Marc Elias]
Look, I think that that was my big concern. It's the reason why my law firm and I representing that voices of an organization that represents the interests of veterans and the Alliance to Retire Americans, which represents older Americans. We intervened in that case as parties, not as amicus, but as parties.

So we were we were in the caption as defendants precisely to make sure that, you know, there was zealous representation. And we filed briefs, you know, at the lower courts and in the in the Supreme Court. Ultimately, the Mississippi solicitor general argued it in the Supreme Court.

But, you know, look, I think that there were a number of reasons why the RNC went to Mississippi. I think that collusion was an option that they before we intervened. I think they also were trying to get the case to the Fifth Circuit because they thought that there was a best chance of a circuit split and therefore getting getting it to the Supreme Court.

How worried are you about this fall's elections?

[Rep. Raskin]
Oh, I'm extremely worried, but I'm extremely determined, too. I mean, put it this way. I'm not worried about the politics of it so much anymore.

I, you know, I just got back from Florida. I spent the weekend down there before I was in Oregon and Washington state. I was in North Carolina, New Hampshire.

So I've been everywhere. We're getting huge, massive crowds coming out, not just for No King's Day, but for campaign rallies. I just I did it with Emily Gregory, who won the state representative seat where Mara Lago is.

They spent more than three million dollars against her, like outspending her, you know, more than five to one. And still she won because there was such a massive grassroots outpouring. So I think that we if we keep doing our job right, there are landslide conditions forming all across America.

But I'm very worried about the kind of stuff we're counting on you for, Mark, which is all of the skullduggery and, you know, all of the mischief and the attempts not they no longer have a plan to go out and get the votes. Right. I mean, tariffs didn't work for them.

That drove the economy into a ditch and it was illegal and unconstitutional. Their war is in their illegal, unauthorized, undeclared war is a nightmare. Inflation is soaring.

The president's numbers are plummeting. There's division within their ranks. Lots of my Republican colleagues are just deciding to leave.

They're defecting from MAGA. You know, Marjorie Taylor Greene is gone. They are going to just try to do whatever they can to fix the election, by which I mean, break the election and steal the election.

And that's exactly what they did, of course, in 2020. And this is a sign of an authoritarian political party. They don't accept the outcomes of public elections that don't go their way.

And they try to steal elections. That's the whole meaning of Trump calling up Secretary of State Raffensperger in Georgia and say, just find me 11,780 votes. He wasn't trying to stop electoral corruption.

He was trying to engage in electoral corruption and fraud.

[Marc Elias]
That's exactly right. And so far, just this year, we have seen him say that he wished he could cancel the elections. We can't.

He has said that he wished he had called in the military to seize ballots in 2020. He didn't, but we've seen him do that in Fulton County and subpoenaed them in Arizona. He has said that Republicans need to take over the voting in a number of places.

He's put out the number 15 places. And so like he and he said that regardless of whether the Republicans pass the SAVE Act or not, which they're not going to be able to, he will unilaterally impose a ban on mail-in voting and restrictions on voter registration and restrictions on in-person voting. And so my final question to you, because I know you have limited time, is I keep saying and I keep quoting a federal judge in a case that we won in D.C. that the president has no role, no role in setting the rules of elections. But I'm going to leave it to you to offer the final word here about what Donald Trump can or can't do legally and constitutionally.

[Rep. Raskin]
She, of course, is completely right about that. The framers of our constitution weren't idiots. They weren't going to put the president in control of presidential or congressional elections, knowing that the president was a political actor.

That's why it is left to the states to administer the elections. And most state constitutions and state laws do everything they can to strive for neutrality and objectivity and impartiality in the administration of elections. And, you know, that hasn't always been the case, but historically we've moved much closer to that.

So the whole Trump thing is such a throwback to go back, you know, centuries in terms of the attempt to steal elections. It's not the president's role when he says, well, we're going to suspend the elections or cancel the midterm elections. We had midterm elections during the U.S. Civil War. We had midterm elections during World War II. Why would we cancel the elections just because Donald Trump's feelings are going to be hurt when he loses in a landslide because his policies are a disaster for the country? And, you know, the thing about using the military, I just think more and more military people are standing up against this.

He, of course, has tried to gerrymander and stack and pack the ranks of the military. But so many veterans and so many, you know, people lower down in the military hierarchy are speaking out against this. But you can see why they went after our six colleagues, all of them veterans, who said you don't have to follow a lawless order.

I mean, they're thinking about a lot of lawless orders, and that's precisely why they wanted to attack them. But, you know, to no avail, because people really are standing up. People in the states and the counties are standing up.

The federal judges are standing up. I mean, our main problem, as I imagine you would agree with, is the shadow docket now when they can get the cases into the shadow docket and they overturn a 90 page magisterial authoritative district court opinion with one paragraph or something like that. That's not the rule of law.

I think that we are, you know, in the fight of our lives every day until the election. Then after the election, we keep fighting all the way until we seek a new Democratic Congress, which is what we're working for all over the country.