[Marc Elias]
Republicans are rigging maps and silencing voters all across the nation. It is one of the most coordinated attacks on fair representation and free and fair elections we have ever seen. My next guest, J'Nai Nelson, she's the president and director counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, and she is on the front line of the fight to protect democracy.

In fact, she just argued before the United States Supreme Court, the very important Calais versus Louisiana case. It's a landmark redistricting case that could decide whether Black voters in the South will have a real voice in state legislatures and Congress in the years to come. In this interview, we break down what's at stake in the fight for fair maps, how these cases will shape elections for a generation, and why the future of American democracy may depend on what happens next in Louisiana and around the country.

But before we get into it, subscribe to Democracy Docket to stay informed about how you can defend democracy. J'Nai Nelson, welcome to Defending Democracy.

[J'Nai Nelson]
Hey, Mark, how are you?

[Marc Elias]
Good. So there is a lot going on right now in court. There's a lot going on that's not in the courts, that are in the streets, all in service of the fight for democracy.

So you sit in a very lofty perch. So hello up there. As the head of not just a civil rights organization, but the leading voting and pro-democracy civil rights organization.

So when you survey the landscape, the good and the bad, right, the No King's Protests and the assault on voting rights in court, the civic activism that we see among people who are energized and the efforts by people to roll back history. How do you make sense of the moment we are in?

[J'Nai Nelson]
It's hard to make sense of it. I'm glad that we're in conversation. Thanks for having me, Mark.

I've been a long admirer of your podcast and all of the communications that you send out to keep all of us so aware of what's happening in this democracy. I think what we can say is what is happening is absolutely senseless, but the way to make sense of it in terms of just understanding the historical underpinnings is to know that this country has battled over power, political power, since its inception. And we are at another inflection point.

And what the Legal Defense Fund has always been aware of is the fact that Black people have often been exploited in that battle for power and have been used as the vector for the undermining of democracy. I think some of that is coming to light now in ways that we've been seeing and trying to shine a black light on for decades, but it's becoming a bit more visible to others, but still not visible enough. And it's important that we see it in that full context.

[Marc Elias]
Yeah. So one of the reasons why I wanted to have you on was because of the organization that you had and the historical perspective, therefore, you bring. And I think that too oftentimes, when people think of the struggle for voting rights, whether it's the 1965 Voting Rights Act, whether it was the Civil Rights Act before that, whether it was the fight for desegregation in schools, whatever, right?

The way we learn it now, the way we learn it in the rearview mirror was, okay, there was this terrible time in America where there were not civil rights. And then Thurgood Marshall came along and Martin Luther King, Jr. came along. And then in the course of a few decades, it was a victory after a victory after a victory, and everything got much better.

And of course, that isn't how it happened. That isn't the struggle that took place. That isn't all of the wins and the failures and all of the other players who played critical roles.

Fannie Lou Hamer, who played a critical role in getting the Voting Rights Act passed by running for Congress and contesting the outcome of an election that was patently unfair. It sort of sanitizes it all. So talk a little bit about, in an era of TikTok and social media where everything wants to be neat and clean, talk a little bit about how both what the truth was and is, but also how do you bring that sense of fortitude, that sense of like, you know, stick with it that is necessary?

[J'Nai Nelson]
That is such an important question, and it has been so dangerous for us to think of our story in such a linear way, and to think that we had actually solved problems through these saviors that came along in the civil rights movement. And we got this incredible legislation like the Voting Rights Act of 1965, you know, like the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Fair Housing Act of 1968. That was, yes, a heady time that produced transformative legislation for this country.

And I would say the Voting Rights Act was probably the most transformative of all. But what people don't understand is that all of that came out of such tumult and turmoil and violence, violence, human sacrifice, and that it was preceded by a period of extraordinary domestic terror visited upon Black citizens and others, but primarily Black citizens, to keep us away from the ballot box. And these fights began, you know, back when the 15th Amendment was ratified in 1870, right?

These are not new fights. Immediately after that ratification, there was an immediate backlash, which is why it took nearly a century for the right to vote without racial discrimination to become fully realized, at least on paper, through another piece of legislation, the Voting Rights Act. But even after that, there were still struggles to ensure that we all had full access to the polls.

And the reason why it's important to understand that back and forth and the ugliness of it all is because it really never ended. Right after the Voting Rights Act being passed, it was immediately challenged, you know, within months of its passage. And the Supreme Court had to say, no, it is constitutional, just a year later in South Carolina versus Katzenbach.

And it's been periodically challenged ever since. And it began to be constrained, you know, within about two decades of its passage. So it's not as if we've ever fully embraced the idea of becoming a full-blown multiracial democracy.

There has been opposition from the beginning and ongoing. And if we appreciate that, then these fights are not as surprising. And the work that you do and the work that LDF does is understood as a necessary, unfortunate, but necessary part of protecting and advancing our democracy.

[Marc Elias]
So you talk about the role that LDF plays in this work, and it is central and it is pivotal. And for anyone and for anyone who's looking for the organization that is on the front lines, look no further than LDF. And so everyone should support them and sign up.

And we'll put all the links to all of that in the description of this episode. But, you know, one of the common refrains we hear right now is that the courts are not going to save us and that the courts are not necessarily even on our side. On the other hand, you know, you run an organization that relies, to some extent, on the courts.

You know, you need a functioning judiciary and you need their, at some level, I think, their to be public confidence in a judiciary. On the other hand, you know, there are decisions that come out of the courts that are hard for people like you and me to defend. So how do you balance that?

[J'Nai Nelson]
The way I hold that tension, that tension of seeing the courts as a space of opportunity and promise and possibility, but also the reality that they have never been consistent. The courts have never been consistent in a holding and protecting civil rights and the values that we believe in at LDF. I know that in the same way that we litigate, we do policy work, we have organizers, we have researchers, we do public education.

We use every tool in the toolbox and the courts are one tool. They are not the only tool. They are not often the most reliable tool, but they are a critical tool to advancing racial justice.

And we know that there will be wins and there will be losses. We know that there will be moments when it's almost impossible to reconcile what the court is doing on the one hand in certain arenas and on the other hand in others. But I also can point to many wins that we've secured, that you've secured, that we've secured together as co-counsel on cases.

I'm just thinking about the fact that we were able to quash the executive order that attempted to require proof of citizenship and other onerous burdens for people to vote, that we were able to win Allen v. Milligan a couple of years ago that made it clear that Section 2 protects the use of race as needed to make sure that there's no racial discrimination in districting. But of course, we were back before the court re-litigating it again just this year.

So the court is a space of extraordinary contradiction. And that's something that we have lived with our entire 85-year existence, using the courts to transform this country. But I would say that we cannot afford to abandon the court, certainly not to our opponents and certainly not even to the judiciary itself, because it is such a critical institution.

[Marc Elias]
So I want to talk about the Louisiana case in a moment. That's the case, the Section 2 Voting Rights Act Redition case that you personally argued in the court. And I have some questions about that.

But before I do, I want to take a step back and talk about one or two sort of doctrinal things that are on my mind. The first is going all the way back to the Shelby County decision, which was the decision in 2013 that dismantled Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act, which was a critical provision that prevented against discrimination in voting. And in the run-up to that, I looked at a lot of what the conservers were arguing and what the pro-voting groups were arguing.

And I sort of was confused, and I remain confused by this today. The Supreme Court seemed to adopt a test. And frankly, a lot of the parties sort of bought into it, which I understand why, because when you're arguing for the Supreme Court, you kind of have to buy into what the Supreme Court has said the doctrine is.

That essentially, you know, that in judging Section 5 of the Voting Rights Act or other things, you know, you have to make sure that you are treating states equally and that Congress is not being overly harsh, you know, the congruent and proportional sort of test. And as I was looking at that, I was thinking, the Fifteenth Amendment doesn't say anything about any of that. The Fifteenth Amendment just says guarantees the right to vote and then gives to Black men, and then later was expanded to women in the Nineteenth Amendment, and then gives Congress the authority to implement that.

It doesn't say anything about equal dignity to the states. In fact, I suspect if you asked the Congress that passed the Fifteenth Amendment how much it was concerned about the dignity of the former Confederate states, they probably didn't care anything about the dignity of it. Do you ever think, like, we've just, like, in some sense, seeded—not that we've seeded it on purpose, but, like, we're sort of starting from the wrong place.

You know, like, I listened to the Louisiana case, and I was thinking, like, Congress passed a law pursuant to a grant of authority they have. If Congress wants to change the law, Congress should change the law. But why are we talking about all the rest of this?

I'll be right back with more of my conversation with Janette Nelson in a moment. You know, Republicans are rigging the map and trying to silence voters across the country. It is no exaggeration to say that the 2026 elections, well, they're at risk.

I founded Democracy Docket in 2020 to cover what's happening to democracy in court, and the growing team at Democracy Docket tracks the anti-democratic groups that are working to undermine free and fair elections, as well as Republican voter suppression tactics and much, much more. Support their work now by becoming a premium member by clicking in the description below.

[J'Nai Nelson]
One hundred percent. I can't tell you how frustrating it is, and you know this because we do the same thing in litigating within the confines of laws and strictures that make no sense, that are inconsistent, and that actually are inherently contradictory with precedent. So it is very difficult to have to play and color within those lines and yet point out the hypocrisy without fully alienating your audience.

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, I get that because, like, I was sitting there, and this is now getting into the argument, but we'll talk about it in more detail, but I was listening to some of the arguments and, you know, you and the others were saying, like, there still is racial discrimination and we still need this. And then I'm thinking, like, why do we have to get into any of this? Like, if Congress doesn't think there's racial discrimination, Congress can repeal the law, but Congress hasn't repealed the law.

And so, like, that's the end of the show. That's the end of the story. They passed the law pursuant to a constitutional grant of authority.

And why is it on you? Why does the head of LDF have to get up and explain why this is, why is the burden on you? Why isn't the, you know?

[J'Nai Nelson]
I, listen, you are preaching to the choir. I fully agree. And, you know, these have been long established principles, right?

Congress's wide berth to interpret and pass legislation pursuant to its enforcement powers under the Reconstruction Amendments that has been affirmed under the Necessary and Proper Clause that has been affirmed for centuries now at this point. And there's no basis, even in the Shelby County case that you referenced, congruence and proportionality has never been applied to Section 2. So the idea that that is even a question on the table is an invention.

And it's an invention that contradicts this court's precedent, which held, you know, in City of Rome, another case not that long ago, I mean, 1980 is kind of old for some folks, but certainly in my memory, you know, in 1980, the court was really clear about the fact that the Voting Rights Act is fully constitutional. It is not subject to congruence and proportionality. It is just a clear exercise of Congress's power under the Reconstruction Enforcement Clauses, open and shut case in theory.

But we now have this, you know, this allergic reaction to the concept of race as a remedy that is undermining our ability to address race when it discriminates. And that is really the failure of this country, of our court system for decades. That is our Achilles heel.

And that has led us into this moment where we are on the precipice of absolute tyranny. And it's unfortunate that we have arrived here when we had all the tools along the way, all the right precedent to guide us in a better direction.

[Marc Elias]
Maybe it's because I just spent too much time hanging out with Federalist Society folks and taking them literally when I shouldn't have. But the 13th, 14th and 15th Amendment, you can't disconnect from race. Like, literally, they were enacted to do away with slavery and the slavery of African-Americans.

Like, it was race-based chattel slavery that they were doing away with. And you can't read the 15th Amendment as being race neutral. It's not trying to be race neutral.

And so I just, I don't understand. I mean, I know I'm preaching to the choir here in some sense that a bunch of people who read the Second Amendment in this hyperliteral way that, you know, people, I'm not an expert in the Second Amendment. When it comes to the 13th, 14th, 15th Amendment, they just kind of like, they're like, oh, yeah, no, those are, those are, you know, we have evolved past that.

So I find it frustrating. The other doctrinal question I have to ask you, though, which is I firmly believe. So, you know, the only right that, and the courts have accepted in a number of cases that voting is a right, OK, like it's a, you know, we can, they can have a debate about what that means, but the only right that is subject to a balancing test, a like, what's convenient to the state, what's, what, how much does it harm voters, is the right to vote.

Like, every other right, you know, is something that essentially the state has to have really good reasons to infringe upon, but not the right to vote. And I cannot help but connect that to the fact that so many of the cases that led us down that path involved Black voting rights. And I just can't help but think we would not have this sort of very watered down test for when a voting law is burdening the right to vote and call every ball and strike in favor of the state, which is essentially what this Anderson verdict, it's sometimes referred to, test does.

I can't help but think we wouldn't have that test, but for the fact that in most of the cases that developed that test in the late 1990s, early 2000s, Black voting rights were at stake. And I'm just curious if you've thought about that at all, if you agree with it or you think I'm being too harsh.

[J'Nai Nelson]
No, I don't think you're being too harsh at all. And I think it reveals something that many people don't fully appreciate about our Constitution in general, and that it is in and of itself a series of compromises and contradictions that are largely based on race, right? Just the, you know, the entire way the Senate is constructed, you know, the way the Constitution falls short of going as far as it could have, even under the Equal Protection Clause, to be very explicit.

It imposes a penalty if states don't allow for the full exercise of voting rights, right? It allows for the reduction of representation, but it doesn't really do as much as it could. All of these were negotiated compromises in order to appease the states and yet try to advance political power and citizenship and the civil rights of Black people.

But you can't compromise civil and human rights. You can't compromise fundamental rights that the Supreme Court itself said as far back as 1886, a right that is preservative of all rights. There should be no compromise or negotiation there, right?

I mean, clearly states have the ability to determine the time, place, and manner of elections and to do the administrative function of running our elections, but not in a way that infringes upon anyone's right or that harms certain groups disproportionately. But somehow we've gotten into, as you said, you know, a balancing test or unfortunately, even under Brnovich, right? The case that Justice Alito wrote the majority opinion for just a few years ago, which now has narrowed Section 2, the very remaining provision of the Voting Rights Act that we're fighting to hold on to, he already narrowed it when it comes to addressing voter suppression and more election administration issues by making the test nearly impossible to meet.

And that's what we fear may be the case right now when it comes to redistricting, which is why it's so important that we're having this conversation to point to all the different links and how there are these series of ways in which we've undermined the very right that was meant to solidify this democracy and the very piece of legislation that gave birth to this multiracial democracy, the Voting Rights Act of 1965.

[Marc Elias]
All right. So let's talk about the Supreme Court case. You argued the side of essentially defending Section 2.

The procedural posture of this case is a little bit odd. It started with a lawsuit that you brought, my law firm brought, that gained voting rights under Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act for Black citizens of Louisiana. I always start by pointing out that the fact that the Black population of Louisiana had to live under the indignity of having their federal voting rights violated before this case should be an absolute national scandal.

No one should have to live under the conditions of having their and Black voters in Louisiana and, by the way, also in Alabama were judged to have lived under those conditions. So we owe them a huge apology, which they have not yet received. Okay.

So it started there. Then a group of white voters, I know they call themselves non-African American voters. For my purposes, we're just going to call them white voters, filed a lawsuit saying the white voters were being discriminated against, which is honestly just like preposterous and also a sign of the times we live in.

You know, I went back and I tried to find instances where these kinds of racial discrimination claims were brought on behalf of white voters. And it really has not happened since the beginning. I think the very first Shaw claim, very, very first one in the early 1990s, were white Durhamites.

But since then, even the people opposing voting rights have had the decency to find Black plaintiffs here, the masks off, like masks off. They're like, no, no, no, no, no, we're not dressing this up, right? This is about us.

And that case goes to the Supreme Court. And the Supreme Court should have just summarily said, get out of our courtroom. But instead, they heard the case and then set up a re-argument on a broader question than even the plaintiffs wanted.

And that is essentially the continued vitality of Section 2. And you stood up in the courtroom, and I thought you were brilliant. I mean, you were absolutely brilliant.

You were brilliant on the law. You answered every question. But I thought you were particularly brilliant because of something that we were just talking about.

You refused to back down from the fundamental principle of the righteousness and the constitutionality of the Voting Rights Act. And that's a hard thing to do. I mean, first of all, for people who have never argued in the Supreme Court, it's a hard thing to do because there are nine justices, and they're throwing questions at you.

It's a hard thing to do because it's a very small courtroom, and they're like sitting right on top of you. It's also, though, a hard thing to do, though, and this is where I wanted to ask you the sort of how you did this. Because you have to worry about winning the case in front of you, which may mean buying into a set of assumptions in a question or buying into a doctrine, while also maintaining the moral and legal fortitude of your position on the big question.

And I thought you did a great job with that. How did you approach that?

[J'Nai Nelson]
Well, as I said earlier, you need to first understand the lines within which you know you are coloring based on what the court has said before, and then also where you have some leeway to speak to what I will just frame as the hypocrisy of what is underlying the argument, the atmosphere, the briefing. And I think it's important to thread that needle, to make the case as the justices understand it, and to explain why you win on that basis, but then also to explain that there is an alternative reality that is legitimate that also must be considered as part of this. And that reality is the fact that no Black person has ever been elected in the state of Louisiana at all.

Statewide, I should say. I want to be really clear. Statewide, on a statewide basis.

Not secretary of state, not governor, not lieutenant governor, not attorney general. None of those offices have been held by a Black person elected statewide, even though this is a state that is 33% Black and that has the second highest percentage of Black people in all of the states, save for Mississippi. And while numbers alone do not necessarily dictate what political power should look like exactly, when political power is so minimized that this one-third population has a say in only one out of six congressional districts, that's a clear indicator that something is wrong.

And for most people, the logic would be, okay, that's entirely wrong. There should be some proportional representation. We know that the Voting Rights Act, again, as part of a compromise, says that there's no entitlement to proportional representation.

So that's sort of the first fiction in some ways that we're working around to say, even though there are folks who represent a substantial amount of the population, it's okay if they are never represented, right? So long as we are more respectful of traditional districting criteria or some other factors. So we're constantly living in a world where compromises have already been made for us on behalf of the communities that we represent.

And we have to make our case in light of those compromises, but also bring the very strongest facts before the justices, before the judges in the lower courts that we argue, that not only address that test, but also point out the ludicrous of some of these principles.

[Marc Elias]
Yeah. I listened intently to the argument. And every time people raise traditional redistricting criteria, I always start by chuckling inside, because maybe part of the problem is the traditional redistricting criteria were to screw over Black voters in the South.

Did it ever occur to you that maybe the reason why these were the traditional redistricting criteria were because of the effect they had in elections? And then they added in some of the discussion that justices, some of the justices added partisanship as a traditional redistricting criteria, which is, boy, has that traveled a long road. I mean, we went from partisanship, the Supreme Court conservative saying, yes, it is an evil.

Yes, in fact, it may even be unconstitutional, but we can't measure it. We can't come up with a test. And therefore, it's a political question.

But by the time we got to 2025, some of them were like, oh yeah, partisanship, partisan gerrymandering, just another traditional redistricting criteria. I'm like, where did that come from? So I laughed at that.

But I have a question for you about where we go from here. So there have been varying estimates. Fair Fight said, which is the organization started by Stacey Abrams, published a report, I think, that said that if you were to lose this case, and I'm not saying you will, and I think everyone needs to, like, the number of times people have predicted that voting rights were going to die at the Supreme Court, only to be surprised, you know, I could list several.

But just to talk about the stakes as opposed to be predictive. Fair Fight said that if the Voting Rights Act was struck down, it could mean 19 districts, congressional districts held by either Black members of Congress, or in some instances, actually held by white representatives in Congress, but who were elected by Black voters as the candidate of their choice, where Black voters were able to influence the outcome of the election. It could be 19 districts.

The New York Times published something that said 12. So let's, let's just stick with 12 as kind of a, that would be an unbelievable setback for democracy in this country.

[J'Nai Nelson]
It would be extraordinary. It would take us back to a time of homogenous governance, right, where this increasingly multiracial, multiethnic democracy would be governed by elected officials who do not reflect the background, the experience, or the identity of the growing number of people who they would be representing. That is a recipe for disaster that is unsustainable for a country.

And it's not the democracy that we said we wanted to be. It's not the multiracial, fair democracy that balances the will of the majority with protection of minority rights. It is something that will take us in a direction that I fear we're headed if we don't snatch it back, which, you know, we're fighting so hard to do, where we will find ourselves back at a time when there is such gross political inequality and such a significant disconnect between the represented and those who are elected—and I say that in air quotes because elections will become meaningless if the lines are so manipulated—that I don't think we can be taken seriously as a democracy. So I hope that there's an appreciation of what is at stake here.

It's not just only about one group of voters. It is really the entire foundation of democracy that is at risk in this case and in others that challenge it. I just can't emphasize enough what that lack of representation would mean not only for Black communities, but for this country as a whole.

And, you know, the statistics you gave are alarming enough at the congressional level. What we're not talking about is what this means for state legislatures, for what this means for city councils and school boards and all the other offices and governing bodies that rely on district lines. So it's going to require us to think much more radically and transformatively about our election process as a whole, which may be a good thing.

It may lead us into proportional representation. It may lead us into other systems of governance and elections that are fairer and more equitable and get us away from this politics of line drawing.

[Marc Elias]
Yeah. So I think that that's where we need to go. I mean, I've been very vocal that I think that when we start to think about what comes next, we can't think about going back to what was.

That we need to think about what the next iteration of democracy looks like, not trying to preserve what the last one was. And I think we need to be bold about that. I think we need to be unapologetic about that.

And so you do a lot of policy work, as you mentioned. Talk to me about how you think we got here. I mean, you know, the story goes something like this.

And again, you're going to tell me it wasn't nearly this clean, but the story goes something like this. The Voting Rights Act gets passed in 1965 with, you know, a bipartisan coalition. That's undoubtedly true.

In 1982, it is expanded. In fact, the current Section 2 that you just argued about has a lot of its roots in that, in those amendments. And that is also a bipartisan vote and signed by President Reagan, who was very conservative.

In 2006, it is reauthorized 98 to 0 in the Senate and with only 33 no votes in the House, signed by George Bush, another conservative Republican. A little known fact, although I'm sure you know this, it was actually lobbied for by the Business Roundtable and by the CEO of Walmart, who at the time was actually the head of the Business Roundtable. So it truly represented a nonpartisan, bipartisan, cross-partisan, use whatever term you want, but it was a consensus of all parts of American society.

And here we are, though, now, where when the John R. Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act came up in Congress last, when President Biden was president, not a single House Republican voted for it. And, you know, here we are in 2025.

And, you know, I think it is fair to say that it has, that the Voting Rights Act is no longer viewed as the crown jewel of American democracy, which is what I think Ronald Reagan called it. And it's viewed in a different light. And I'm curious, in your wearing your policy hat, what accounts for it?

And what do we do about it?

[J'Nai Nelson]
So thinking about this from a policy perspective, I think that it really isn't about policy, it's about politics. Because, as you pointed out, there have been four reauthorizations of the Voting Rights Act. They have been remarkably and increasingly bipartisan.

And the shift that we've seen has really come about once we saw this extremist, conservative faction grow that has taken control of the Republican Party. We are a nonpartisan organization, so I do not do political analysis, but I can state fact. And the reality is, you have decades of reauthorization of this act that I still believe, and I think many still believe, is the crown jewel of civil rights legislation and a crown jewel of this country's evolution as a democracy.

And yet, just as the political tides and winds began to change, all of a sudden, people who were once part of the same party have now backed off it completely. And that is, I think, consistent with the willingness to compromise democratic principles, democratic institutions overall for raw power. So when you look at it in that broader context, it is not entirely surprising that people would trade what I call the very birth certificate of this multiracial democracy for whatever transaction they think they may be getting in the moment that gives them immediate and entrenched power.

That's what the partisan gerrymandering is about. That's what all these voter suppression tactics and methods are about. There is a bet being placed on the ability of a small faction of folks in this country to wrest the democracy from the rest of us, and they are putting all their chits in the center of the table.

And I say, for those of us who are going to be most affected, it's time to just turn that table over.

[Marc Elias]
You know, one of the things that always frustrates me is how hard it is to get people to understand the voting system that they don't experience. And so the example I always use when I talk to white audiences, and it is white audiences that I'm talking to in these circumstances, is that we have in this country a huge problem with people waiting in too long lines to vote. The problem is that the only communities affected by it are black voters, and in some places, young voters, college campuses.

That effectively, if you are not on a college campus and you are white, you are almost never going to be in a long line to vote. You know, but if you are a black American, you are oftentimes finding yourself in a long line to vote. And by the way, I wish I could lay this off on—I mean, I am a partisan.

I wish I could lay this off on the Republicans. Like, this is true in Fairfax County, Virginia, which is controlled by Democrats. It's true in Fairfield County, Connecticut, which is run by Democrats.

It's true in the six metro counties around Atlanta, most of which are run by Democrats. And so this is not even like laying this off on Republicans versus Democrats. This is just like the truth is that we have a disparity in how long the wait times are within counties, within counties where it's just like the resources of the counties are being allocated in a way that are disadvantaging black voters.

And that's just a—I shouldn't say small. It's just one example that is easy to prove because it's data-driven. Like, you can literally look at cell phone wait time data—I know you're familiar with it—and see it, and it just jubs off the page at you.

But I could list a whole bunch of others, like the rejection rates for mail-in ballots. You know, the racial disparity in the rejection rates of mail-in ballots. And again, it's true in Florida and it's true in Georgia, but it's also true in Washington state.

It's also true in Colorado. Like, these problems of democracy and the lack of rules. I sometimes joke that, you know, if you took our system, it treats men better than women, old better than young, and white better than black.

It is literally a system that advantages old white men. And people can debate whether that was intentional or accidental. Yeah, right.

But it just is. And I worry, I worry, J'Nai, that with everything going on in our country and all of the other crises that people see, they kind of just want to, they kind of want to believe the fairy tale that Republicans are selling, that we are, that we've elected Barack Obama and the problems are all solved. And you know what?

Go watch Barack Obama's first and second speech of his first election in 2008 and 2012. What did he talk about in those speeches? Long lines.

Long lines. Black voters waiting in long lines. Now, it's interesting, in the 2008 speech, he sort of celebrates it about democracy.

In 2012, he's like, this is a real problem. And he appoints a bipartisan commission to try to tackle it. But how do we break through to people that we do not have a system of democracy that is treating all Americans the same?

[J'Nai Nelson]
Well, one, it begins with having media that is going to be truthful, having these alternative vehicles to, you know, surface some of these issues. And I think, you know, having podcasts like this one helps to democratize some of that. But unfortunately, mainstream media does not cover these issues in the way that it should, and certainly doesn't put it as starkly as you just did.

But that's just the real data. And there are lots of efforts to try to get people to be in conversation with folks who don't agree with them. I think another part of that is getting people to experience what they may not experience.

I mean, we hear these arguments all the time, even with respect to voter ID. Everyone has a voter ID. Why can't you bring your passport or your driver's license?

And that's easy to say if you are in a community where most people have them, and you can afford to replace yours when it gets lost. And, you know, the line at the Department of Motor Vehicles isn't that long, and you don't have to worry about taking time off from work. All of those same obstacles apply equally to waiting in long lines at the polls, where people, yes, are entitled under federal law and federal elections a certain amount of time to vote, but it often isn't enough when you consider transportation, when you consider child care, when you consider all the other everyday burdens that people bear.

And it does have a disproportionate impact on Black people. And the resource allocation is a reflection of that. And the only real solution to it, other than bringing people into communities where they don't live and having them witness it with their own eyes up front, is to force these types of conversations into the center and to force media to do a better job of covering these issues in an experiential way, right?

So that it doesn't, it's not just graphs, it's not just talking heads, but it's actually following people through the journey of what it means to vote as a Black person in this country. And it is not one that most people would sign up for.

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, no, like I said, I say this in rooms of White folks all the time. I'd say to them, you know, how long would you wait in line to vote? You know, you're rich.

You don't have to worry about taking time off from work. You don't have to worry about child care. Like, I bet you wouldn't wait an hour in line to vote, right?

So why do you think it's a celebration of democracy when it's a Black person waiting in line? But for you, it'd be a major inconvenience and you'd call your local county official, right? Like, why?

Where is that? So I find that very frustrating. But let me turn to the last topic I wanted to cover with you, which is, you have witnessed, along with the rest of us, what I think is the most shameful capitulation of the legal establishment in modern times.

You know, I mean, certainly there was the complicity of the legal establishment with Jim Crow. But watching the largest law firms of this country pledge pro bono hours to Donald Trump at the same time that they are cutting back on the work that they are doing for immigration causes, for civil rights causes, for fair housing causes, for voting rights causes, is just an absolute shame. And it will be a stain on the legal establishment of the United States for generations to come.

Like, future generations will look back at this time and say, however you view the issues of democracy, they will look back at this time and say, you know, people who had so much, who were making millions of dollars a year, were unwilling to make just a few hundred thousand dollars less a year and meet their obligations to do pro bono legal services, which is not a theoretical obligation. It is actually central to being a lawyer. Like, it is something you get for the privilege of having the right to practice law, which non-lawyers don't have.

A, has it affected your organization? B, what do you make of it? Do you think it's going to get better anytime soon?

Other than being rageful like I am, is there anything we could do about it?

[J'Nai Nelson]
Well, yeah, there are things we can do. And let me just start with some of the early questions. I think it is an absolute shame.

It is a stain on the profession that already suffers from questions about its morality and questions about its conviction to the greater good. And we, the collective we as lawyers, have let the public down, have let this country down by not leveraging the power that we possess, this very unique power that we have to practice law, to be the conduits of the law for the broader public, to abdicate that responsibility and bow and bend the knee to a wannabe king. It is so, so ignominious.

And I also think that it shows how weak we are even in some of our ideology. We all know that common defense agreements exist for a reason. Common interest agreements exist for a reason because we know collective action, collective defense, coming together and sharing strategy can inertia the benefit of all those involved.

Why the law firms that were being pressured did not band together, did not figure out a way to negotiate a formidable counter response to that pressure is beyond me. We're talking about what I would assume are some of the strongest litigators and transactional lawyers in our country who abandon every instinct principle of defense in order to sell themselves and their clients and their pro bono clients out. So no, I have very little sympathy and I have strong, strong concerns about the signal that it sends to the broader profession.

That said, we must, we must not focus only on the kneeling nine or so that did this. We also should be celebrating and lifting up the fighting five. You know, the law firms that looked this administration in the eye and did the staring contest and did not blink and have not suffered economically for it.

At all.

[Marc Elias]
Yeah. I talked to partners at a number of them and they're all having great years.

[J'Nai Nelson]
That's right. In fact, have been rewarded. And so when we get to the question of what we can do, we as individuals, we who have influence in corporations or leadership positions where you're selecting lawyers, you can choose your law firms based on your beliefs when you're deciding who represents your company and your interests.

We as individual citizens and residents can also decide whether we are going to spend our dollars with companies that are represented by law firms that capitulated. So there's a lot of economic pressure and power that we possess and that must be utilized in this moment when apparently that seems to hold the most sway. And yes, it has impacted the Legal Defense Fund.

You know, we do all of our own litigation, but we do work with other law firms and we co-counsel. And that has also been an extreme method of support and allows us to spread out our very limited resources. And that has definitely been impacted by the positions that certain law firms have taken.

[Marc Elias]
Well, look, everyone, this is an organization that is doing the hard work on the front lines. So if you are looking for who you can support to make sure that we have free and fair elections in the future and you want to support an organization that supports your values, please give to LDF. Again, we will put the links to that in the description of this episode.

And if you can't afford to give, you know, sign up and get information from them. They provide a lot of really important opportunities to volunteer, a lot of important opportunities to spread information in your networks. You know, every one of us needs to be an ambassador for the folks doing the hard work and who have the courage to stand up against what is an authoritarian, you know, government that is trying to target nonprofit organizations.

So please, again, we're going to put those links and please support Jene and all of their good work. Thank you for joining me today. And I look forward to having you back when we are celebrating your victory in the U.S. Supreme Court.