[Brian Tyler Cohen]
This is Democracy Watch. Mark, this is the moment that we've been waiting for. We promised everybody just a few days ago that as soon as arguments at the Supreme Court concluded for this big mail-in ballots case, RNC versus Mississippi, that you would come on and explain what the update is.

So we now have that update. Can you explain what just happened?

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, Brian, the Supreme Court today heard a blockbuster of a case that threatens the mail-in ballots of hundreds of thousands of American citizens this November. And boy, did it not disappoint. I mean, from start to finish, this was packed with a lot of argument from both sides.

The conservative justices lined up immediately against the idea of counting ballots that are postmarked by Election Day but received afterwards. They lined up against it and went so far, Brian, as I predicted, to question whether early voting should be allowed or whether it also violates the federal law that's at issue here, which is the law that sets Election Day as the Tuesday following the first Monday in November. The liberal justices were having none of it.

They pushed back. And Brian, they even asked about a point by me in our brief about how in 2000, the Republicans were all for counting these late-received mail-in votes. And in fact, those votes were the difference between George Bush winning and Al Gore winning.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
And so what and what was the reaction to that particular point?

[Marc Elias]
You know, Paul Clement, who argued for the RNC, is as good a Supreme Court advocate as there is. I mean, he is unflappable and he is smooth and he speaks clearly and intelligently. The justices really trust him.

He was arguing for the RNC. And when he got asked, all of a sudden it felt like I could see his blood pressure rising. Like he called it the reddest of herrings.

You know, how dare you? How dare we revisit the 2000 election? Look, he argued that it wasn't applicable because in that instance, the mail-in ballots had gone out late.

I don't know what. So they had gone out late and therefore a court said that they should be counted in contravention of what Paul Clement is now arguing is federal law. I don't know.

It didn't seem like his best argument, but I got the sense that a number of the conservative justices who I understand worked for the Bush campaign, they weren't too eager to have this line of argument either.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
So is there anything you can read from the tea leaves, especially as it relates to some of these conservative justices in terms of how they might rule?

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, look, I think that there were three camps that emerged. There was one camp, the most conservative of the justices, I would say Justice Thomas, Justice Alito, and Justice Gorsuch that were ready to say that not only do ballots have to be received by election day by mail, but that frankly the whole idea of early voting is probably unconstitutional. That when Congress passed a law saying that election day is the Tuesday following the first Monday in November, what they meant was that is the day that all votes needed to be cast and received, and that that's sort of the beginning of the end of the story.

Now, they may not get that far because they may not feel like they need to go to that point about early voting, but I have been warning that this is not the last case the RNC is going to bring, that this is just the way that they get into attacking all absentee voting because they're cast before election day and attacking early voting. So there are three justices, I think, who indicated they were in that place. There are three justices, the three liberal justices, who I think thought that this was like all a bunch of made-up nonsense because after all, the Constitution gives the states the ability to set the time, place, and manner of elections, and yes, Congress can alter it, but there is no indication that Congress thought when they were saying that election day is the Tuesday following first Monday in November that they were saying anything about postmark ballots. Then the three justices in the middle, the chief said actually relatively little. If anything, he sounded more on the pro-voting side than the anti-voting side, but he was somewhat uncharacteristically quiet.

I suspect he wanted to see where the camps shape up. Justice Barrett began coming really hot against the Solicitor General of Mississippi, who all of us have had to put our faith in, and she definitely came hot at him and shook him, but then she also asked some hard questions of the other side as well, and Justice Kavanaugh, he was hard to read. He did, by the way, make sure that Paul Clement had an opportunity to give a fuller answer on the Bush versus Gore point.

He also weirdly seemed to want to pin down the state of Mississippi that they did not think that this would disenfranchise voters. Recall, Brian, I represented another set of voters and organizations as defendants in this case. When we petitioned for me to be able to argue this case, the Supreme Court majority decided they didn't want to hear from me.

Suffice to say, Brian, I would have said it does disenfranchise voters, but Mississippi's Solicitor General said it didn't, so it was a little hard to say where he is. I'd say that right now it felt to me like 4-4, with probably Barrett being the swingiest of them, but it would not shock me if this was 6-3 in either direction.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
Given the fact that this is going to have major implications on the next election and that, frankly, Purcell should kick in anyway and prevent any ruling from interfering in the 2026 election because we are so close to that election and ballots are already going to start to be printed, is there some imperative for the Supreme Court to move faster than they normally would? I mean, the Supreme Court will hear these cases and we might not have a decision from them for months and months and months, but this is a little bit different because the longer you wait, the more cataclysmic and chaotic an election will become if they have to abide by this ruling.

[Marc Elias]
Yeah, so I'm glad you asked about Purcell because actually Justice Kavanaugh asked about Purcell as well. He asked Paul Clement, you know, hey, we have this doctrine that says you don't make changes to election laws, courts don't strike down or change election rules in close proximity to elections. Is there a Purcell problem here?

And again, you know, Paul Clement, who is, you know, really one of the best oralists before the Supreme Court, I can tell he didn't have a good answer. He just sort of waved it off and said, oh, no, no, no, no, this would be easy. States, no problem.

They could, you know, if you just said ballots don't get, you know, counted if they're received after election day, that wouldn't be much of a change. That wouldn't confuse any voters. States would have no problem implementing that.

You know, all of a sudden I finally found a law that the Republican National Committee thinks could be implemented at the last minute without any problem. You know, when it comes to every other law that might enfranchise voters, then it's super complicated. It'll cause mass confusion.

Election officials won't know what they're doing. But, you know, striking down the date and the processing of absentee ballots in like half the states in the country, no problem.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
Mark, at the top, you had also kind of warned about the fact that this doesn't just focus on ballots that were received after election day. This may also kind of catch in its crosshairs the idea of the entirety of early voting. Is there anything else that they seem to have a desire to attack here as they kind of put all their cards on the table?

[Marc Elias]
Yeah. You know, Brian, when I argued before the Supreme Court in December, you and I did a video afterwards. I talked about the fact that the Republicans in that case, which was a campaign finance case, were asked a series of questions along the following.

If we agree with you here, does that mean you are not going to come back and argue that this next campaign finance version is unconstitutional? And the Republican lawyers for the for the party were like, no, no, no, we're definitely not saying we won't come back and argue that in the next case. We may very well.

And so I was waiting to see if we got the equivalent of that here. In other words, would the justices put to Paul Clement and Sauer, who is the solicitor general of the United States, who, by the way, was just an appendage of the RNC in this argument? It was really unbelievable.

I mean, like he was just there to be like, I think that the RNC basically got this right. I know that's a big shock, big shock for everyone. But anyway, you know, and and the fact is that there was this side issue beyond the early voting issue, which would be a really big deal if they banned all early voting beyond, by the way, doing away with almost all mail in voting.

Right. Because mail in voting is done before Election Day. Right.

So so like basically, if you took their position to its logical extreme, which I've said all along, we have to assume is where the RNC is going to go eventually, not in this case, but eventually where the Trump administration is going to go, because Donald Trump is already saying those things. That's what he wants. That that you know, that that that this that this would really up and, you know, all manner of voting.

But there was one additional fact that I actually didn't anticipate. And it was originally brought up by Justice Barrett. But then it sort of gained momentum, which is that as originally conceived, the idea of Election Day was not just the day in which ballots were cast, but the day in which voters were essentially verified or qualified to vote.

Now, remember, this is back in the 1800s. This is before, you know, the idea of like universal voter lists or voter registration, certainly well before, you know, computers or any any ability to generate, you know, lists of voters. So so the question was, what about the verification process?

Because as Justice Barrett and some of the other conservatives pointed out, that verification of voters oftentimes doesn't take place until after Election Day. Yeah. Right.

So think about it this way, Brian, in you know, I think you vote in California. If you cast a mail-in ballot, you submit the ballot. Let's assume it gets in on time, right?

It's in before Election Day under this rule. They then after Election Day process that ballot and look you up against the voter file. So in other words, they may not verify that your ballot is eligible until after Election Day, even if it got in weeks before.

And so what was being suggested is, does this mean that essentially all ballots that are not verified by election, they have to be tossed out? It sounds a whole lot like stop the count. Remember the Donald Trump's thing?

Like why were there big tranches of ballots being counted at 3 a.m. or 4 a.m. or the next day? It very much sounded like that. And, you know, Paul Clement said, well, you know, that's a different case.

And that's not an easy case. And that would be. And then eventually he said, look, I'm not, you know, impressed.

He said, I'm not firmly taking a position we wouldn't be back to challenge that. Maybe that's my next lawsuit. And I think there he gave away the game.

Yeah. Which is that Republicans want to enact Donald Trump's vision of voting. And what that means is that it's all Election Day.

It's all in person. But also, if you vote in a city where they take longer to tabulate ballots, when you hit midnight on election night, like essentially it is stop the count.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
Right.

[Marc Elias]
Right. Or at least it's stop the count for every ballot that has not yet been authenticated or has not yet where the voter has not yet been verified, which is going to be millions upon millions and millions of votes in cities like Los Angeles, in cities like New York. Right.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
But more importantly, in cities like Detroit and Milwaukee and Philadelphia and Atlanta, where the population centers are the Democrats path to victory in any of those states.

[Marc Elias]
Correct. And you mentioned Philadelphia. And that's where I was going to go is remember, in Pennsylvania, Republicans have refused to allow the passage of a law to start counting absentee ballots at all, regardless of when they're submitted.

They can't start even opening them to process them to be counted until after the polls close, which means in a city like Philadelphia, you're talking about disenfranchising almost all of the mail-in voters in the city of Philadelphia because getting those opened and processed and and verified would be impossible. And listening to the conservative justices, again, latch onto this. Now, with Barrett, it was not clear whether she was latching onto it as like a feature or a flaw.

But it was clear that, you know, from the RNC standpoint, they're going to look at this down the road. So anyone who thinks this is the last of these cases is wrong. Mark my words.

If they win this case, they will challenge early voting. They will challenge no excuse absentee voting. They will only want military members to be able to vote by mail.

And this latest twist, stop the count.

[Brian Tyler Cohen]
Well, clearly, I think everybody watching right now can see the importance of elevating your voice because nobody is bringing this up. Nobody is latching onto these points like you are. If anybody watching right now cares at all about our upcoming elections, about the Supreme Court cases, about legal news, the single best outlet to follow all of this stuff is Democracy Docket.

So if you're not yet subscribed, that's the news outlet Mark founded to focus on everything voting elections. I'm going to put that link right here on the screen and also in the post description of this video. It is especially important that you subscribe now as we head toward midterm.

So, again, click that link right here on the screen and make sure to subscribe. I'm Brian Taylor Cohen. I'm Mark Elias.

This is Democracy Watch.